

    Home
    Q&A
    Boards
    Community
    Contribute
    Games
    What’s New
    Systems
        3DS
        Android
        iOS
        PC
        PlayStation 3
        PlayStation 4
        Switch
        Vita
        Xbox 360
        Xbox One

3DSAndroidiOSPCPS3PS4SwitchVitaXbox 360Xbox OneMore Systems
Log In Sign Up
GameFAQs
Q&ABoardsCommunityContributeGamesWhat’s New
Pool of Radiance – Guide and Walkthrough
PC

    Home
    Guides
    Q&A
    Cheats
    Reviews
    Media
    Board

GameFAQs

BOOKMARK
Would you recommend this Guide? Yes No Hide
Guide and Walkthrough by ssjlee9

Version: 1.32 | Updated: 06/08/2020
Highest Rated Guide

AD&D FORGOTTEN REALMS VOL. I: POOL OF RADIANCE
Exhaustive Game Information
Version 1.32 - June 7, 2020

by Stephen S. Lee (ssjlee9@gmail.com)
You may distribute this freely, so long as you give proper credit to me.
This is written for PC version 1.3, but it should still be mostly accurate for
  other computer versions and platforms, except for the NES version.
Please feel free to e-mail me with corrections or suggestions.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
-----------------

You may jump to the appropriate section by searching for "SECTION " + section
numbers.

0 - Ten Most Frequently Asked Questions
1 - Introduction
1.1 - About This FAQ
1.2 - Where To Get The Game
2 - Technical Detail On Running The Game
2.1 - Recommended Emulators
2.2 - Installing the Game
2.3 - Game Setup
2.4 - Getting Rid of the Copy Protection
2.5 - Using Gold Box Companion
2.6 - Game Interface Basics
2.7 - Restarting the Game
2.8 - Transferring Character
2.8.1 - Transferring Characters to Curse of the Azure Bonds
2.8.2 - Transferring Characters to Hillsfar
2.9 - Interface Abuse
2.9.1 - Duplicating Items
2.9.2 - Cheat Mode
3 - Party `
3.1 - What You Should Know Before Creating Your Party
3.2 - Party for This Game Only
3.3 - Party for All Four Games
3.4 - Party for Hackers
4 - Character Development
4.1 - Equipment
4.1.1 - Initial Equipment
4.1.2 - Upgrading Equipment
4.2 - NPCs
4.3 - Training Your Characters
4.4 - Magic-User Spells to Learn
4.5 - Abusing the Manual of Bodily Health
5 - Combat Strategy and Tactics
5.1 - General Nonmagical Strategy
5.2 - Magical Spell Strategy
5.3 - Other Magical Strategy
5.4 - Tips for Specific Enemies
6 - Maps
6.1 - Maps Introduction
6.2 - Civilized Area (New Phlan)
6.3 - The Slums
6.4 - Sokal Keep
6.5 - Kuto's Well
6.6 - Kuto's Well Catacombs
6.7 - Mendor's Library
6.8 - Podal Plaza
6.9 - Cadorna Textile House
6.10 - Kovel Mansion
6.11 - Wealthy Area
6.12 - Temple of Bane
6.13 - Wilderness
6.14 - Nomad Camp
6.15 - Kobold Caves
6.16 - Yarash's Pyramid
6.17 - Lizardman Keep
6.18 - Buccaneer Base
6.19 - Zhentil Keep Outpost
6.20 - Valhingen Graveyard
6.21 - Stojanow Gate
6.22 - Valjevo Castle
6.23 - Valjevo Castle Hedge Maze
6.24 - Valjevo Castle Inner Tower
7 - Game Mechanics
7.1 - Mechanics Introduction
7.2 - Hit Points and Status Conditions
7.3 - Time
7.4 - Experience and Gaining Levels
7.5 - Statistics
7.5.1 - Statistic: Strength
7.5.2 - Statistic: Intelligence
7.5.3 - Statistic: Wisdom
7.5.4 - Statistic: Dexterity
7.5.5 - Statistic: Constitution
7.5.6 - Statistic: Charisma
7.6 - Races
7.6.1 - Race: Human
7.6.2 - Race: Dwarf
7.6.3 - Race: Elf
7.6.4 - Race: Gnome
7.6.5 - Race: Half-Elf
7.6.6 - Race: Halfling
7.7 - Classes
7.7.1 - Class: Cleric
7.7.2 - Class: Fighter
7.7.3 - Class: Magic-User
7.7.4 - Class: Thief
7.8 - Physical Combat
7.8.1 - Calculating THAC0
7.8.2 - Calculating Armor Class
7.8.3 - Calculating Chance To Hit
7.9 - Other Ways of Resisting Attacks
7.9.1 - Resisting Magical Attacks
7.9.2 - The Saving Throw
7.10 - Encumbrance
7.11 - Battle Order
7.11.1 - Surprise
7.11.2 - Initiative
7.12 - Turning Undead
7.13 - Morale
7.14 - Party Strength
8 - Magic Spellbooks
8.1 - Notes on Spells
8.2 - Cleric Spellbook
8.2.1 - 1st Level Cleric Spells
8.2.2 - 2nd Level Cleric Spells
8.2.3 - 3rd Level Cleric Spells
8.3 - Magic-user Spellbook
8.3.1 - 1st Level Magic-user Spells
8.3.2 - 2nd Level Magic-user Spells
8.3.3 - 3rd Level Magic-user Spells
8.4 - Spell Summary
8.5 - Temple Spells
9 - Items
9.1 - Item Basic Mechanics
9.2.1 - Basic Weapons
9.2.2 - Basic Armor
9.2.3 - Other Items
9.3 - Magic Items
9.4 - Random Magic Items
9.5 - Summary of Locations with Magic Items
10 - Creature Statistics
10.1 - Notes on Creature Statistics
10.2 - Detailed Bestiary
11 - Hacking the Game
11.1 - Hacking Overview
11.1.1 - Useful Hacking Utilities
11.1.2 - DAX File Format
11.2.1 - Creature File Format
11.2.2 - Creature Effects List
11.2.3 - Item File Format
11.3 - Script File Format
11.3.1 - Script Overview
11.3.2 - Script Variable Types
11.3.3 - Script Commands
11.4 - Address List
11.4.1 - Flag List
11.4.2 - Other Memory Locations
11.5.1 - Executable Array Locations
11.5.2 - Code Hacking
12 - Fluff
12.1 - Journal Entries
12.2 - Novelization
12.3 - Historical Accuracy
13 - Appendix
13.1 - References
13.2 - FAQ Version History
13.3 - Acknowledgments
13.4 - What I Want


SECTION 0 - Ten Most Frequently Asked Questions
-----------------------------------------------

These are quick questions with quick answers; there is more detail for most of
the questions elsewhere in this FAQ.

1. Why should I play this game?

Pool of Radiance is a tactically challenging old-school RPG with a reasonably
faithful adaptation of 1st Edition AD&D rules.  It was popular in its day,
still well-remembered, inspired many other CRPGs, and has aged reasonably well
for such an old game.  You can also transfer your characters to later games in
the series.

2. Where do I get the game today?

The simplest, legal way to get this game is through http://www.gog.com/.  You
want Forgotten Realms: The Archives Collection Two.  This will get you seven
other old-school AD&D CRPGs with it.

3. How do I run the game on a modern computer?

The simplest way is to use DOSBox, which runs on a wide variety of platforms,
and which the GOG version includes for you.  Either the main branch, or one of
the alternative forks like the SVN-Daum branch (which has save states), will
work just fine.

4. I'm getting the error "Insert disk 3 in drive c:".

Versions 1.0 to 1.2 are picky about where they are installed; the usual version
on abandonware sites is 1.0.  These cannot be installed in a directory more
than one level deep from C:\ (so C:\GAMES\POOL\ will never work).  POOL.CFG
must also be edited (with any text editor) to point to the correct directory.
You must also include a backslash at the end of the directory name.

5. This user interface isn't very friendly; is there a tool that will help out?

The sound in this game is primitive (even compared to Curse of the Azure Bonds)
and drastically slows down moving around, far more than in any later Gold Box
game.  You should probably turn it off.

The keyboard interface has a steep learning curve at the outset, but isn't hard
to get used to.

If you're emulating the game in DOSBox under Windows, you can download Gold Box
Companion from http://gbc.zorbus.net/ to provide a variety of modern interface
enhancements.

6. What party should I start out with?

Regardless of whether or not you plan to transfer your characters to later
games, my recommended party, assuming you are not hacking the game, is:

  3 Male Elf Lawful Good Fighter/Magic-Users
  1 Male Half-Elf Lawful Good Cleric/Fighter/Magic-User
  1 Female Human Cleric
  1 Male Elf Fighter/Magic-User/Thief

"M"odify your stats to the maximums before starting.  It may seem like
cheating, but all of the AD&D Gold Box games are balanced around having very
high stats.

7. Combat in this game is difficult; what are some tactical pointers?

  * If you want to avoid random combats in the first place by parleying, an
    "A"busive attitude generally works best.
  * Keep your party together so no one gets surrounded.  This is a bad idea
    against enemies with area attacks, but that is rare in this game.
  * Anchor your flanks with either terrain features or your best fighters, so
    monsters don't outflank your party.
  * Avoid being encumbered; the extra movement is helpful.
  * Archery is good enough to be worth the trouble of maintaining a supply of
    arrows.  You should eventually equip fighters with fine composite long
    bows.
  * If confronted with spellcasting enemies, inflicting even 1 point of damage
    is enough to prevent an enemy from casting a spell that round.
  * Use the best spells listed below.
  * Many of the best spells render enemies helpless; you can automatically kill
    such helpless enemies in one physical attack at your leisure.

8. Which spells are most effective in combat?

  * Sleep is king early in the game, and can render up to 9 enemies helpless.
  * Stinking Cloud has a short range and isn't guaranteed to work, but it is
    effective even against many powerful monsters.
  * Fireball is great at clearing out large numbers of enemies.
  * Cure Light Wounds may not seem like much, but it's the only cure spell you
    can cast in this game.
  * Protection from Evil gives you significant protection from evil monsters
    (most monsters are evil).
  * Hold Person cast by clerics can paralyze up to 3 humanoid enemies.
  * Prayer is a strong general-purpose buff/debuff spell.

9. How do I defeat the ogres and trolls in the slums?

Cast Bless before starting combat.  The Sleep spell can prevent an ogre from
attacking you while it lasts.  Cast it on the two ogres so they can't attack
you.  Leave the sleeping body of the ogre on the right alone, to block the path
of the three trolls in the back.  Focus fire on the troll in the front to take
it down, then stand on its body so it cannot revive.  Take out the other three
trolls from a distance with archery, killing them at around the same time, then
finish off the ogres.

10. How do I progress in Sokal Keep?

The dead elf near the beginning has a parchment with the keywords "LUX",
"SAMOSUD", and "SHESTNI".  These can be used in parley with the undead to keep
them off your back, and to finish the mission.  If you get into combat with
undead, turning undead doesn't actually work well unless you have a level 6
cleric, or are desperate.  For the large orc/hobgoblin attack, enter the room
where the attack occurs using the southeastern door, back up your characters to
where a 3-square choke point is, and form a defensive line behind that.  You
may also want to hire NPCs in New Phlan just for this combat.


SECTION 1.1 - About This Document
---------------------------------

This document is meant to provide, in one place, exhaustive detail about the
original 1988 Pool of Radiance, the first computer RPG adaptation of 1st
Edition Advanced Dungeons and Dragons.  This is not to be confused with the
later, poorly-received Pool of Radiance: Ruins of Myth Drannor.

This document assumes you are playing IBM version 1.3, which is the one that
the GOG release also uses.  All known differences between that and version 1.2
are technical; there were some game script changes between 1.1 and 1.2.  There
aren't even all that many known differences between the IBM version and other
platforms.  The NES version is the exception, as changes were made to fit the
game on a smaller cartridge and take advantage of the NES's superior sound
capacity, and is also significantly easier (true of many console adaptations of
computer games), though it still follows the same overall design.  The tabletop
adventure is even more different, if it even counts.

The later games in the series are, in order: Curse of the Azure Bonds, Secret
of the Silver Blades, and Pools of Darkness.  You can also transfer a character
to and from Hillsfar, which is an action RPG.

While this document *can* be used as a walkthrough, it is primarily intended to
provide complete game details for either hardcore RPG fans, or those who have
already completed the game at least once.  I don't make much effort to either
avoid spoilers or keep things brief.  If you are a more casual fan, the best
gameplay sections to read are the ones on party creation, character
development, and combat tactics.  You may also want to use the section on
detailed game mechanics in sections 7 to 10 as a reference.

The most recent version of this document will always be uploaded first to
GameFAQs.

The fastest way to contact me is via e-mail; I do not check anything else
regularly.

SECTION 1.2 - Where To Get The Game
-----------------------------------

This only covers legal ways to get the game.  If you want not-so-legal ways,
your favorite search engine can help, though all copies I've seen by that means
are version 1.0.

The easiest way to get a legal copy of the game is through http://www.gog.com/
and look for Forgotten Realms: The Archives Collection Two.  It will run on any
of Windows, macOS, or Linux using a built-in copy of DOSBox, and also includes
Curse of the Azure Bonds (game 2), Hillsfar, Secret of the Silver Blades (game
3), Pools of Darkness (game 4), Gateway to the Savage Frontier (game 1 of a
second series), Treasure of the Savage Frontier (game 2), and Forgotten Realms
Unlimited Adventures.  It also includes all the available cluebooks for those
games.  It is *not* a complete set of all the Gold Box games, because the three
Krynn games are not included.

If you specifically want a physical copy (probably because you like to collect
physical copies of games like me), the best way is through eBay.  It is no
longer easy to find the original 1988 version of the game for $5-$10, but it's
still easier to find than complete copies of most other vintage DOS RPGs of its
era.  A complete copy of the original IBM version should have:

  1. Gold two-piece box (about 5.75" wide x 8.75" tall x 1.25" deep).
  2. 3 5.25" low-density floppy disks.  3.5" disks were rare in those days,
     but you might occasionally see a copy with 2 3.5" low-density floppies.
     This will have a version up to 1.2 on them.  (I haven't seen a floppy
     copy with version 1.3.)
  3. Rule book (27 pages).
  4. Adventurer's Journal (38 pages).  Note that the rules here and in the rule
     books aren't as complete, or even as accurate, as those found in later
     Gold Box games.
  5. Code wheel.
  6. Reference card (this is platform-specific).

Many used copies come with the clue book; this is not part of any original
version of the game.  An original copy should also include advertisements for
other SSI games, though most collectors won't care much for those (as this
isn't an Infocom or Ultima game).

An unopened, still-shrinkwrapped copy of the original IBM PC release is now
worth more than it did at the time of original release.  You MIGHT even be able
to sell it for enough to account for three decades of inflation and opportunity
cost!

Other physical versions of the game include:
* AD&D Limited Edition Collector's Set -- Unlike many things labeled as limited
  or collector's editions, this is actually genuinely difficult to find.  It
  has floppy versions of Pool of Radiance (version 1.2), Curse of the Azure
  Bonds, Hillsfar, Heroes of the Lance, Dragons of Flame, and War of the
  Lance; a 120-page manual; 3 maps; 3 code wheels; a Dragonlance card sheet;
  and a certificate of authenticity; all in an extra-large box.

  This and the original version of Pool of Radiance are the only versions of
  the game with significant value to collectors.

* AD&D Forgotten Realms 3-Game edition - This WizardWorks release has floppy
  versions of Pool of Radiance, Curse of the Azure Bonds, and Secret of the
  Silver Blades.  (WizardWorks was a company that, like Slash, re-printed
  classic computer games.)

* AD&D 9-Game Collector's Edition - This WizardWorks release is a CD
  compilation of all nine AD&D Gold Box games.

* AD&D Forgotten Realms Archives Silver Edition -- This is a CD compilation of
  many of the DOS AD&D games.  It doesn't include the Krynn Gold Box games, but
  does include the Eye of the Beholder trilogy.  At the same time, other
  smaller collections with subsets of these games were also released.

* AD&D The Forgotten Realms Archives -- This is a later version of the
  Forgotten Realms Archives Silver Edition.

There also exists a fan-made version reworked for Unlimited Adventures (FRUA).
If you have and are familiar with FRUA, you may download it here:

http://frua.rosedragon.org/pc/modules/g/game39.zip

For instructions on how to get started with FRUA, search the Web for "FRUA with
essential links" and read the original post.


SECTION 2.1 - Recommended Emulators
-----------------------------------

The standard emulator for playing Pool of Radiance today, and the one that
comes with the GOG version, is DOSBox (http://www.dosbox.com/).  The latest
main branch release is version 0.74-3, which is less than a year old as of this
writing.

There are other branches of DOSBox.   The primary one that I recommend is
DOSBox SVN-Daum (http://www.msu.edu/~yootaewo/_db/setup.exe).  This includes
many extensions to DOSBox; the most important features it adds for vintage
gaming fans are Roland support (not relevant for this game) and save states
(relevant for any game, though it does not work reliably).  If you are playing
more recent games, SVN-Daum's mouse emulation is not as reliable as standard
DOSBox.

If you want to accurately emulate the original IBM PC, the standard emulator
is PCE/ibmpc.  This will emulate the original IBM 5150 very accurately, down to
how slow it is, including emulated floppy access.  This emulator is more useful
for games relying on the idiosyncrasies of the original IBM PC, and it's harder
to use than DOSBox, so it's probably not the best emulator for Pool of
Radiance.  Pool of Radiance does in fact work on an original IBM PC, but was
glacially slow even by 1988 standards.

SECTION 2.2 - Installing the Game
---------------------------------

The GOG or other ready-to-play versions of the game should take care of this
for you.

If you have a compressed archive of the game, I recommend creating a directory
specifically for DOS games, and placing Pool of Radiance in a subdirectory
there.  Use this command to mount your directory (change directory as
appropriate; this assumes you installed Pool of Radiance to something like
C:\Emulation\DOS\GAMES\POOL\):

  mount c C:\Emulation\DOS\

This command is best placed in the [autoexec] section of dosbox.conf (or
dosbox-SVN-Daum.conf).

If you have a CD or floppy disks, and a computer that has the appropriate
drives, you can mount them in DOSBox with these commands (change drive letters
as appropriate):

  mount a A:\ -t floppy
  mount d D:\ -t cdrom

and then you can install the game from the drive normally in DOSBox.

If you do not have version 1.3 (as far as I know, you have version 1.3 if and
only if your version is not a floppy version), you will have to install the
game no lower than one level below the DOS root directory.

The game version is listed on the credits screen, below the line that says
"Game Created By: SSI Special Projects".  It is not on the main menu as in all
other Gold Box games.  If no version is listed at all, you are running version
1.0.

SECTION 2.3 - Game Setup
------------------------

If you move the game to any directory other than the default directory, you
must edit POOL.CFG; even version 1.3 will not do this properly for you.  Change
the third line to the appropriate directory; you must include the drive letter
at the beginning and a backslash at the end to guarantee proper function.  Even
then, in versions older than 1.3 this will not work if the game directory is
two or more levels below the DOS root directory.

The fourth line of POOL.CFG points to saved games.  If you want to move saved
game files to and from this directory, they are CHRDAT?#.* and SAVGAM?.DAT,
where ? is the letter (A-J) of the saved game and # is the character number.

The other lines control graphics type (first line, "C" or "E" or "T"), sound
(second line, "P" or "T" or "S"), and whether or not the full intro plays
(fifth line, "F" or "N").

There is no real reason to use any graphics type other than EGA aside from
nostalgia, and there is no music and no AdLib/SoundBlaster/Roland support, so
there is no reason to configure the game to use "T"andy sound.  Having sound on
at all significantly slows down movement, so you should probably choose
"S"ilence.

In all later Gold Box games, you can simply delete the *.CFG file if you want
to reconfigure the game, but this doesn't work properly in any version of Pool
of Radiance.  It will work in version 1.3 if you then manually edit POOL.CFG
to include drive letters and terminating backslashes in lines 3 and 4.

Failure to set up the game properly may result in "Insert disk 3 in drive c:"
errors and a crash.

SECTION 2.4 - Getting Rid of the Copy Protection
------------------------------------------------

Isn't the code wheel copy protection scheme obnoxious?  If you are playing
the GOG version, you don't have to worry about this; you can enter anything you
want at the prompt.

You can remove the copy protection with a hex editor.  I use XVI32, but any hex
editor will work.

If you have version 1.2:

1. Open START.EXE (make a backup copy first)
2. Search for this hex string: 2E 0C EB 0A 9A
3. Replace the value 0xEB with 0x74.

The copy protection should now be gone.  The game will now skip the
introduction (what there is of it) in addition to the copy protection.

If you have version 1.3:

1. Open GAME.OVR (make a backup copy first)
2. Go to hex offset CD8 and CD9; the bytes there should be 0x75 and 0x02.
3. Replace both the 0x75 and the 0x02 with 0x90.

If you have a version for which the above do not work (this solution is
inelegant but always works):

1. Open START.EXE or ST.EXE, whichever you have (make up a backup copy first)
2. Search for this text string: BEWARE
3. Replace this text and all the subsequent 6-letter code words with XXXXXX (or
   any other all-capitals 6-letter string of your choice).  There should be 13
   of these, with the last one being WYVERN.

You can now enter your 6-letter string instead of having to use the code wheel.

You can also bypass the copy protection using cheat mode, though that turns
on a number of other cheats as well, which you may not want.

SECTION 2.5 - Using Gold Box Companion
--------------------------------------

Gold Box Companion is both the most useful tool for actually playing the Gold
Box games, and a useful factual reference.  Its homepage is here:
http://gbc.zorbus.net/

You must specifically tell Gold Box Companion the title of the DOSBox window
running the game; if you are running a different branch you must enter its
title, e.g. "DOSBox SVN-Daum".  You must also tell it which specific game you
are playing.

Valuable features it adds are the enhanced automap, the automated lookup of
things like journal entries, the ability to show statistics that the game does
not normally show (like saving throws), and the Fix command for automated
magical healing; this Fix command is in all later Gold Box games natively.  It
also adds a bunch of hacking and cheating features, if that's your thing.

SECTION 2.6 - Game Interface Basics
-----------------------------------

This is described at some length in the documentation, but here are some
comments on non-obvious elements:

ADJUSTING GAME SPEED
You can adjust game speed with either Ctrl-F11 and Ctrl-F12 in DOSBox, or the
"D"elay command in-game.  If you set "D"elay to 0, many messages will flash by
too quickly for you to read on most setups.  7000 cycles/second and "D"elay
of 1 usually work well.

MOVING AROUND THE FIRST-PERSON VIEW
When moving around in the first-person display, use the left and right arrow
keys to turn, the up arrow key to move forward, and the down arrow key to turn
around.  Moving forward consumes 1 minute of game time.  Turning does not take
any time, and has no chance of triggering random encounters.

You can use the "A"rea command to toggle an overhead map of your current area;
however, the map doesn't show details (not even doors), does not work in all
areas, and shows areas you haven't yet visited.  A better automap is available
if you are running Gold Box Companion.

In order to thoroughly search the square you are in, use the "L"ook command,
which takes 10 minutes.  If you want to do this automatically in every square
you move through, you can toggle this with the "S"earch command.  Taking this
much time drastically increases the chances you will get a random encounter,
however (though it is less than by a factor of 10).

If you actually want to deliberately trigger a random combat, a way to do so
taking minimal time is to hold down a movement key when you can't actually
move.  In the first-person view, hold Up in the first-person view when a wall
is in front of you; doing this with walls to both sides will minimize the size
of the combat.  On the Wilderness map, you can hold Down into the Moonsea.

SAVING AND LOADING THE GAME
You can save the game by encamping and issuing the "S"ave command.  If you do
not want to save the game, hitting Escape will skip the save.  You will then be
asked if you want to exit to DOS or not.  (If you try to quit to DOS in a
training hall with a party, you will be asked to save the game, and you cannot
skip that.)

You can only load the game from the game's main menu, or if you drop all
characters at a training hall.  (Or if you use an emulator with save states.)

WARNING ABOUT SAVED CHARACTERS
If you load a saved game, any individual character that had been "R"emoved from
the party will be deleted outside of the saved game.  This can cause unexpected
effects that don't happen in later Gold Box games.  You should back up your
characters routinely if you ever swap out characters.

COMBAT
* The space bar will turn off all autocombat.
* Alt-Q turns on autocombat for your entire party.
* Distance is not quite Euclidean; a diagonal move is always 1.5 squares, and
  fractions are rounded down.  If you aim 12 squares west and 5 squares south,
  that's a distance of 14 = (12 - 5) + 5 * 1.5, not 13 = sqrt(12 ^ 2 + 5 ^ 2).
* A single square is 10 feet by 10 feet.  That means a 2x2 ancient dragon fits
  into a square 20 feet on a side, which is a tight squeeze.  Also, that means
  that a three-square-wide door is 30 feet wide.  (Don't think about this too
  hard.)
* You can attack a monster in melee either with the "A"im command, or by
  moving into one.  If you run out of movement points next to your target, you
  must "A"im.
* You can also use the "A"im command just to look around and see what is where;
  there's no better way of doing this as you can't zoom out.
* "D"elay will move your current action to later in the round.
* "G"uard will end your action for this round, and give you a free attack of
  opportunity on the next monster to move next to you, until it is your turn
  again.  You must be using a melee weapon to have this command available.
* "Q"uit simply forfeits any action for that round.  This should not be
  confused with the "Q" command for turning on auto-combat for that specific
  character.  If one of your characters mysteriously enters auto-combat, this
  UI quirk is the reason.
* There is a bug that permits you to individually target your own unconscious
  and dead characters with damage spells.  You can actually convert dead
  characters to merely dying this way, with spells like Cause Light Wounds or
  Burning Hands.

MISSING INTERFACE FEATURES
The interface features missing from this game that are present in later games
include:
* Mouse support (though this was never polished; the game plays well enough
  with only the keyboard).
* The Fix command, which automates healing (Gold Box Companion adds this).
* The game doesn't automatically remember which spells you've used for
  re-memorizing (Gold Box Companion adds this).
* Some later games will highlight characters who can gain a level in purple;
  you'll have to track this either yourself or with Gold Box Companion.
* There is no option to change the game difficulty.  If you want to play this
  game in challenge mode, try lower starting statistics or other restrictions.
* The game isn't intelligent as its successors when selecting potential targets
  for ranged attacks; it will cycle through allies, which means that manual
  targeting is often faster.

SECTION 2.7 - Restarting the Game
---------------------------------

All Gold Box games allow you to restart your game at any time, which restarts
the plot but allows you to keep all experience, spells, items, and money.

To do this:

  1. Go to a training hall.
  2. "R"emove all characters from the party.
  3. "Q"uit to DOS.
  4. Restart Pool of Radiance.
  5. "A"dd the characters you want to restart the game with.

SECTION 2.8.1 - Transferring Characters to Curse of the Azure Bonds
-------------------------------------------------------------------

You must "R"emove characters from your Pool of Radiance party for COPYCURS.EXE
to work.  You should also select "Other" for where your saved characters are
going from and to.  Unlike later Gold Box games, you can't simply tell the
configuration routine where the saved games are.

Characters in Curse of the Azure Bonds will start with 25,000 experience, so
you can start to transfer characters profitably once you exceed that in Pool of
Radiance.

Any abnormal statistics of 19 or more will be rounded down to 18, so you
cannot keep very high Constitution scores from Manuals of Bodily Health, or the
Strength 21 conferred by a Potion of Giant Strength.  Do note that Strength 19+
will be rounded down to 18, not 18(00) as you may expect.

You do otherwise get to keep statistics; you can even keep Strength of up to
18(00) granted by either Gauntlets of Ogre Power or the Enlarge spell.  You do
keep Dexterity 19 or Constitution 19 that an elf or dwarf can get.

You keep any extra hit points gained from very high Constitution, or from the
improperly implemented rules for gaining hit points as a multi-classed
character.   Multi-classed characters may not gain any hit points the first
time they train in Curse, but gain hit points normally thereafter.

You do not keep any items or money, though everyone starts with 300 platinum.
That's a Bag of Plot Spilling much stronger than that of the tabletop version,
where you get to keep most magical items.

Magic-users do keep knowledge of all the spells they've learned.  Clerics
actually do not, because Animate Dead does not exist in any other Gold Box
game.

Follow this step-by-step procedure for a minimum of problems:

  1. If you want to hack a fighter to paladin or ranger, it's best to have
     enough experience to gain a level in Curse of the Azure Bonds as one of
     those classes.
  2. Make sure your characters are not under the effect of a Potion of Giant
     Strength.  Effects that set Strength to 18(00) are okay, but the transfer
     routine will make such effects permanent.
  3. Go to a training hall and "R"emove all the characters you want to
     transfer.
  4. Run COPYCURS.EXE and transfer your characters from Pool of Radiance to
     Curse of the Azure Bonds.
  5. Start Curse of the Azure Bonds.
  6. "A"dd desired characters from "P"ool.
  7. "R"emove them from the party immediately.
  8. If you want to hack a fighter to paladin or ranger, create a brand new
     paladin or ranger.
  9. Exit Curse of the Azure Bonds.
 10. For each character, use a hex editor to open the appropriate *.GUY files,
     and change offset 0x10 to match the value of offset 0x11.  These both
     represent Strength without extraordinary strength, so these values should
     be 18 for most maximized characters.  If you fail to do this, the Enlarge
     spell will not work on any transferred characters, as the transfer
     algorithm usually does not set offset 0x10 correctly.
 11. If you want to hack a fighter to paladin or ranger:
     a. Open the *.GUY file of the fighter in a hex editor.
     b. Change offset 0x75 from 2 (fighter) to 3 (paladin) or 4 (ranger).
     c. Offset 0x10B is your current fighter level; change this to 0.
     d. Change offset 0x10C (for paladin) or 0x10D (for ranger) to whatever
        your current fighter level had been.
     e. Make a copy of the *.FX file from a newly generated paladin or ranger
        and give it the same name as your character's.
 12. Re-start Curse of the Azure Bonds and "A"dd your fixed characters from
     "C"urse.  A hacked paladin or ranger will need to gain a level to fully
     restore normal behavior.

SECTION 2.8.2 - Transferring Characters to Hillsfar
---------------------------------------------------

Unlike transferring from Pool of Radiance, you can retain abnormal high
statistics from Hillsfar.

High statistics are also retained transferring from Pool of Radiance to
Hillsfar, so an indirect transfer does let you keep high statistics.

This apparently circumvents the Strength bug that will block Enlarge from
working.

If you are eligible to gain a level, you will automatically gain appropriate
levels, but gain no hit points for these levels.

SECTION 2.9.1 - Duplicating Items
---------------------------------

This interface loophole allows you to duplicate any item you own without using
a save game editor.  To do so, perform the following steps (back up your saved
game directory before doing this; it is easy to screw up):

   1. Go to a training hall.  (In later games you can do this outside a
      training hall.)
   2. "R"emove one character from the party.
   3. "S"ave the game.
   4. Create a dummy character.
   5. Trade all the items to be duplicated to the dummy character.
   6. "R"emove the dummy character from the party.
   7. "D"rop all other characters.
   8. "L"oad the saved game from step 3 or 11b.
   9. "A"dd the dummy character to the party.
  10. You should now have two copies of the desired items; transfer them to
      your real characters.
  11. If you want more copies:
      a. "R"emove the dummy character from the party.
      b. "S"ave the game.
      c. "A"dd the dummy character back to the party.
      d. Go back to step 5.
  12. Once done, discard the dummy character and re-add the removed real
      character.

SECTION 2.9.2 - Cheat Mode
--------------------------

To begin the game in cheat mode, start the game with using the executable
option STING, which must be all capitalized.  That means invoking the game with
"start STING" (or "st STING" if you have that version), or editing any batch
file to say that.

This activates the following keys:

Ctrl-C -- immediately quit to DOS (not a cheat, and this command does exist in
  later games)
Alt-X -- immediately win a combat.
J (in a training hall) -- train for free.


SECTION 3.1 - What You Should Know Before Creating Your Party
-------------------------------------------------------------

You should have one thief in your party.  There aren't that many checks for
thief skills in the Gold Box series, but they happen often enough that it is
convenient to have one around; a few sidequests require a thief, and eventually
the backstab feature does enough damage that it is worth the trouble to set up
in combat.  Backstabbing helps much more in later games than this one, because
it doesn't actually work reliably here.  Backstabbing works better with the
combat skill and Strength of a fighter, so your thief should multi-class with
fighter at least.  More than one thief in your party is not useful.

You should have at least one cleric in your party, because otherwise there is
no good way to heal.  No non-human can reach higher than level 5 in cleric, so
humans make the best clerics.  Even though the maximum cleric level in Pool of
Radiance is 6, it is still worthwhile having a human cleric around, because
there is a large leap in the power to turn undead between levels 5 and 6.  You
definitely want a human cleric if you plan to transfer characters to Curse of
the Azure Bonds.  You should have one other person capable of at least a little
healing; I recommend a multi-classed half-elf cleric in this game and a paladin
or knight in all other Gold Box games.  More clerics do not really help all
that much; clerics just do not have the awesome spellcasting power of either
magic-users or 3rd Edition clerics.

Having numerous fighters around is helpful, both for their high hit points and
good armor, and because unlike 3rd Edition and later, many monsters simply
aren't affected by magic (though this is much more relevant in later Gold Box
games).  You want at least three, to serve as your front line in combat.

Magic-users can deliver awesome magical effects even at low levels, so you want
to have several of those around too; the game becomes significantly harder if
you have fewer than two.

Getting this many fighters and magic-users should be done with multi-classing
in this game, as dual-classing is not available.

Males are physically much stronger than females, so all fighters should be
male.  There is one quest in Curse of the Azure Bonds that requires a female
character, so you should have one female character just for that, but there is
no other gameplay reason to have a female in your party.

There is about enough experience available in all the Forgotten Realms Gold Box
games to hit all level caps without grinding if you explore thoroughly, even
triple-classed characters in the case of clerics and magic-users.  You can
therefore freshly generate characters in later games and not worry about them
being permanently behind.  (Note that this is not true for the Krynn Gold Box
games.)

Gnomes and halflings have a low level cap in fighter.  They have unlimited
advancement as thieves, but so do all other races.  There is no quest in any
Gold Box game for which specifically having one of these helps at all, so you
can safely not use either.

Half-elves make good cleric/fighter/magic-users.  Their racial level limit does
not have much impact in Pool of Radiance, but it becomes severely limiting in
later games; a maximized half-elf cleric/fighter/magic-user transferred to
Curse of the Azure Bonds will hit all the level caps before even leaving the
first town.

A dwarf is only really useful as a fighter/thief, though they are fairly good
at being those.  However, a fighter/magic-user/thief is more useful still, and
there is enough experience around to deal with the lower leveling rate.  Many
lower level magic-user spells are actually still useful even late in Pools of
Darkness.  There are a few places where the dwarf's familiarity with the
underground comes in handy, but it's far fewer than where a thief's abilities
come in useful (and in several cases, having either will work, so having both
is redundant).  The higher level cap of a dwarf fighter versus an elf does help
some, but not as much as you might think, since elves still can get the extra
half-attack at 7th level, and by the later games most of your accuracy will
come from items, magic, and the much higher levels humans can achieve.

Gnomes, halflings, and dwarves all do get significant saving throw bonuses, but
there aren't many spellcasting enemies in Pool of Radiance, and in later games
their level caps being too restrictive outweighs that -- you get better saving
throws with higher levels, anyway.

Elves have decent level limits in fighter (7th) and magic-user (11th), and the
+1 bonus to attack they get with short/long swords and bows also comes in
handy.

Alignment has little game effect; it limits what classes you can be, and
affects the Protection from Evil and Protection from Good spells.  No actions
you take will change your alignment, either.  (You'd think it would, because
alignment has larger effects in both Wizardry or Might and Magic, the other
classic CRPG series that have alignments.  You can get away with being a murder
hobo in this game and still be hailed as a hero!)  There is one Long Sword +2
that may only be equipped by a lawful good fighter, so it helps a little if all
your non-thief fighters are lawful good as well.

You should maximize all relevant statistics before setting out ("M"odify
character).  It may seem like cheating, but the Gold Box games are very much
balanced around having very high statistics, and if you plan to transfer
characters to later games in the series, the documentation explicitly tells you
that your characters need primary statistics of 18.  (Well ... you don't NEED
to do this, but that amounts to playing in extra-challenging mode in Gold Box
games with a high level limit.)

You don't actually need such absurdly high stats with the help of this guide
though, so you might prefer normal stats.  If you do, Dexterity is the most
important statistic; the initiative and Armor Class bonuses you get are both
very strong, and the bonus to ranged accuracy is an added plus.  It is actually
more important than focusing on getting Constitution for the hit point bonus;
as is generally the case in RPGs and strategy games, speed is king.  Having
good Strength is no more than a convenience, since you can eventually cast
Enlarge as needed.

SECTION 3.2 - Party for This Game Only
--------------------------------------

If you do not plan to transfer your characters to later games at all, one power
party that works well is:

  4 Male Half-Elf Lawful Good Cleric/Fighter/Magic-Users
  1 Female Human Cleric
  1 Male Elf Fighter/Magic-User/Thief

This gets you a lot of both spellcasting power and fighting power.  You will
advance in levels slowly, but there is enough experience around that you will
still hit many of the level caps before the game ends.

Having more than about 2 clerics does not really help much, however; and the
faster level advancement from having fewer classes does get you more fighting
skill and the better magic-user spells faster.  The +1 bonus that full-blooded
elves get in combat with long swords and bows is also useful.  Thus I think the
best party is:

  3 Male Elf Lawful Good Fighter/Magic-Users
  1 Male Half-Elf Lawful Good Cleric/Fighter/Magic-User
  1 Female Human Cleric
  1 Male Elf Fighter/Magic-User/Thief

The main adjustment you might make is to have replace one of the elves with
another half-elf cleric/fighter/magic-user; if you are not using Gold Box
Companion, this makes healing more convenient.

SECTION 3.3 - Party for All Four Games
--------------------------------------

The second party above also works best if you plan to transfer characters to
later games.  You still have a thief, two clerics, and plenty of fighters and
magic-users; you also have the one female character needed to complete one of
the quests in Curse of the Azure Bonds.

I would recommend a paladin and rangers in this game if you could actually
create them here.  Some people create pure fighters for this game and use hacks
to switch them to those classes in Curse of the Azure Bonds; see the next
section if you plan to do that.  This is the most practical way of retaining
most characters through all four games.

The most recent version of Gold Box Companion will allow you to play a paladin
or ranger in this game.

With the above party, the plan in Curse of the Azure Bonds is to drop the
half-elf and two of the fighter/magic-users, and replace them with a paladin
and multiple rangers in Curse of the Azure Bonds.  There is enough experience
available there that you can eventually drop the last elf fighter/magic user in
favor of another ranger.

Rangers in later games are fantastic when dual-classed to magic-user after
reaching a minimum of level 9.  Also, there is enough experience available in
Secret of the Silver Blades to start yet more rangers there, so they can be
dual-classed to magic-user at higher levels.  (Long-term planners should bear
in mind that you cannot have more than three characters in your party whose
current class is ranger.  Yes, this restriction from the tabletop rules is
actually enforced and actually becomes limiting!)

SECTION 3.4 - Party for Hackers
-------------------------------

If you don't mind editing your characters to get around not being able to
create a paladin or ranger here, and are not using Gold Box Companion to do so,
you can replace two or all three of the Elf Fighter/Magic-Users in the above
party with human fighters, and hack them into paladin or ranger immediately
after you transfer to Curse of the Azure Bonds.  The game gets significantly
harder if you have fewer than two magic-users, so don't drop below that.

If you are a huge anti-fan of racial level limits (I don't blame you for that!)
you can edit a character to human after character creation, giving you a
multi-classed character with no level limits.  Given the high power levels in
the Gold Box games, this doesn't actually break game balance nearly as much as
it would in other AD&D campaigns.

If you're going to go full-blown class/race hacking, then I suggest:
  1 Male Fighter (edit to Paladin in Curse, then eventually dual-class)
  1 Male Fighter (edit to Ranger in Curse, then eventually dual-class)
  1 Male Fighter/Magic-User
  1 Male Cleric/Fighter/Magic-User
  1 Female Cleric (dual-class to Magic-User in Pools of Darkness)
  1 Male Fighter/Magic-User/Thief

Dual-classing still gives you significant benefits, so I'd still plan on that
with some characters instead of multi-classing everyone.  This is a good way
to use the exact same party through all four games.


SECTION 4.1.1 - Initial Equipment
---------------------------------

Don't forget to "M"odify your characters' statistics before starting out!

Any character with thief as one class should buy leather armor, even if they
can equip something better, because backstabbing is penalized in heavier armor,
and in many cases so are other thief abilities.  You will quickly find better
armor for a thief anyway.

Fighters and clerics should buy banded mail, not plate mail.  The one extra
point of Armor Class that nonmagical plate mail provides is not worth the
additional costs in gold, encumbrance, and movement.

Fighters and clerics should buy a shield.

Pure clerics should start with a flail, and pure magic-users with a
quarterstaff.  Other characters should begin with a long sword.

You do not need to buy bows; you should find some soon enough after starting
the game.  Once you do, buy some arrows to go with them.  Pure magic-users
should eventually buy a few darts.

Every fighter should soon have a mace or flail, to deal with skeletons.  Two-
handed swords do significant extra damage against larger creatures if you are
willing to give up a shield, though elves don't get their racial bonus to-hit
with one.

The old-school CRPG trick of creating a bunch of dummy characters, taking their
gold, and deleting them does work here, but it isn't really even worth the time
it takes.

SECTION 4.1.2 - Upgrading Equipment
-----------------------------------

The fine composite long bow is absolutely worth buying once you can afford its
25000 gold price tag, since it adds your Strength damage bonus to bow attacks;
that is a large enough benefit that it is superior to most magical bows you
will find.  You will need to get lucky with random magical items for better.
The major drawback to the fine composite long bow, aside from its price, is
that autocombat doesn't realize it is actually a bow.

You will eventually want to have mirrors to deal with basilisks and medusas;
having one of these equipped will automatically reflect their gaze attack.
(Unlike in the tabletop game, you do not need to take any special precautions
to avert their gazes otherwise.)

You do not need silver melee weapons, as magical weapons perform at least as
well against monsters that are vulnerable to silver weapons, and you will find
enough of them soon enough.  (The concept of monsters that require weapons that
are silver AND magical is a 3rd Edition one.)  You might as well eventually buy
silver arrows, as there is no place to buy magical arrows here.

You should keep a reasonable number of copies of the Detect Magic spell
memorized so you can check set encounters and special enemies for magical
treasure; this is the main way you will get stronger magical weaponry.  (You
can also just use the magical item checklists elsewhere in this guide.)

A thief should get magical leather armor, or better yet Bracers of Defense, as
soon as possible.  Pure magic-users have no choice but to use bracers.  Both
are best served augmenting bracers with your best Rings of Protection.

Your other fighters and clerics should eventually upgrade to magical plate
mail, which does not have the disadvantages nonmagical plate mail has.  If you
have a large supply of Bracers of Defense and Rings of Protection, those may be
better.  The best combination in this game is Bracers AC 2 with a Ring of
Protection +3, which provide armor as good as Plate Mail +4 without the
encumbrance.  Unlike later games, there don't exist enough magical rings that
taking up a ring slot is a significant concern.

Many magical items are very straightforward, but the common tricky one is the
Ring of Protection.  It improves armor class by its bonus if you are not
already wearing magical armor; it is a nice ring to use if you are using
Bracers of Defense.  A Ring of Protection should, even if it does not provide
an armor class bonus, add its bonus to all saving throws (though only a subset
of Rings of Protection does so in Pool of Radiance).  Multiple Rings of
Protection do not stack; only the best applies.

One thing to watch out for is items disappearing seemingly at random.  Unlike
it happening in other old-school RPGs, this is not a bug.  You will never lose
any items that are not light items (a light item is less than 2.5 pounds)
unless you are offering a bribe or clearly surrendering.  The two non-obvious
places you can lose even light items are in New Phlan's taverns (just stay away
from the pickpockets there once you've made any real progress), and in the
Kobold Caves.

SECTION 4.2 - NPCs
------------------

You can hire NPCs of all four classes at the training hall in Phlan.

I don't recommend doing this unless you're having an especially hard time with
a particular combat; the ogre/troll combat in the Slums and the orc/hobgoblin
attack in Sokal Keep are the best reasons to hire NPCs.

There are many reasons for this:

* You are unable to control NPCs in combat.  Later games may permit you to make
  a Charisma-based leadership check to manually control NPCs yourself, but
  that isn't possible here.

* NPCs aren't very bright.  NPC mages in some versions will happily toast your
  own characters with a fireball; this is more likely in version 1.0 than in
  version 1.3.  NPC fighters aren't as destructive, but they may still blindly
  charge your foes when more subtle tactics are called for.  You can help NPC
  fighters out by making sure they have a bow and arrows, which will reduce
  their enthusiasm for reckless charges.

  The NPC AI is better in later games.  (They also are never mages in games
  after Curse of the Azure Bonds; a lot of people complained about getting

  destroyed by "friendly" AI fireballs back in the day.)

* NPCs will take some experience.  If you rely on NPCs a lot, you might not
  actually hit Pool of Radiance's level caps.

* Hired NPCs will take some treasure.  Some of them will take not only money,
  but precious magical items, which is a steep price.

* NPCs, unlike PCs, check morale in combat.

* While you can trade items freely to NPCs, you cannot take anything from
  them unless they are unconscious or dead.

* A few NPCs automatically betray the party near the end of the game.

* You cannot transfer any NPC to later games in the series.

The other main reason to hire an NPC is simply because some of the better ones
(especially the Hero, who is wearing Plate Mail +1) have magical equipment, so
you can *ahem* tragically get them killed in combat, then *cough* honor their
memory by taking their equipment so it doesn't go to waste.

Some NPCs will join you for plot-related reasons.  Once you get one of these
characters, I recommend focusing on their related quest as soon as possible.

You can manipulate two such plot-related NPCs (Skullcrusher and Dirten) into
staying permanently; they will not take any items or money.  Skullcrusher will
leave if you pass by the entrance to the Phlan city hall, and Dirten will leave
after you clear the Temple of Bane, so simply don't have those characters in
your party at those times.

SECTION 4.3 - Training Your Characters
--------------------------------------

Once a character has enough experience to gain a level, training costs 1000
gold at the appropriate training hall in town.  It can be worthwhile to break
off adventuring to train if you accrue enough experience to do so, though there
generally isn't an urgent need to do so unless you have so much experience that
everyone can train.  (If you wait too long, you run the risk of losing
experience from the rule that prevents you from gaining more than one level at
a time.)

You need to pinch pennies early in the game, because training is a significant
expense early in the game.  Appraise and sell all your jewelry and gems; you
will eventually find more anyway.  As traditional in classic CRPGs, later in
the game you'll have more money than you'll know what to do with.

You will gain a random number of hit points with each level; you may want to
reload the game until you can get maximum hit points.  If you do not have
access to save states, the quickest way is the following:

  1. "S"ave the game in the training hall.
  2. Train the appropriate character.
  3. If you don't gain enough hit points, "D"rop everyone from the party.
  4. "L"oad the game and try again.

For quick reference, a character with the maximum Constitution bonus can gain
the following maximum number of hit points (which does not work the way it does
either in any other Gold Box game, or the tabletop game):

              Con 18      Con 22  Multi-classed characters with Constitution
           Number of   Number of  16-17 can use the Constitution 18 table.  So
             Classes     Classes  do dwarves with Constitution 19.
Class        1  2  3     1  2  3
---------- ---------   ---------
Cleric      10  6  4    13  9  7  Strange buggy things happen with 23 or more
Fighter     14  7  5    17 10  8  Constitution.
Magic-User   6  4  3     9  7  6
Thief        8  5  4    11  8  7

A single-classed human cleric will hit the level cap fairly early.  If you
are transferring characters to later games, you may want to train a second
single-classed human cleric.  It is useful to have such clerics gain enough
(110,000) experience to gain two levels at the beginning of Curse of the Azure
Bonds.

Multiple human clerics are useful in later games, because you can dual-class
some to magic-user and let others continue to progress as a clerics.  Also, if
planning for many games from now, in Pools of Darkness it is useful to have two
high-level clerics at the same time, whom you can also dual-class to magic-
user.

If you are training a single-classed fighter and planning to hack him in Curse
of the Azure Bonds, he can use as much as 325,000 experience as a hacked
ranger, and 700,000 experience as a hacked paladin.

SECTION 4.4 - Magic-User Spells to Learn
----------------------------------------

There are many more magic-user spells than there are spell picks available to
use on them; you want the following spells the most (you can skip spells you
have scrolls for):

Level 1 Spells: take either Enlarge (not useful right away, but it's a strong
  buff later in the game) or Charm Person
Level 2 Spells: one magic-user should learn Knock; all others learn Stinking
  Cloud.  Afterwards, one magic-user who already knows Stinking Cloud should
  pick up Invisibility.  The next most useful spell after those is Mirror
  Image.
Level 3 Spells: for everyone you don't have a scroll to learn it from, take
  Fireball.  After that, you'll want one person with Haste and a couple with
  Slow.  The other useful spells are Blink, Hold Person, and Lightning Bolt.

8ECTION 4.5 - Abusing the Manual of Bodily Health
-------------------------------------------------

Once you find the Manual of Bodily Health in Mendor's Library, some more game
abuse becomes possible.

You can get many copies by either duplicating it, or by restarting the game
repeatedly.  You can then use all the copies to raise everyone's Constitution
to 22.  This will work to increase hit points per level beyond the normal
limits, even for characters who are not single-classed fighters.  A
Constitution of 23 or more is very buggy, and will often either lower hit
points gained, or give you so many hit points that you may exceed 255 and wrap
back around to 0, so I don't recommend raising Constitution above 22.

If you really want to maximize your characters, you can restart the game with
a bunch of copies and use them on brand new characters.  You can actually
"M"odify 1st-level characters even after they have started the adventure, if
they have not yet gained experience -- you can squeeze out a few extra hit
points this way.

You do not get to keep such very high Constitution scores in later games, but
you do retain the extra hit points.  Constitution 22 by itself will not get you
enough hit points to cause problems with hit point overflow in later games.  It
eventually will if you also hack a triple-classed character to human.


SECTION 5.1 - General Nonmagical Strategy
-----------------------------------------

Overcoming the difficulty of combat in the Gold Box games is best done by
proper party selection, acquiring (and remembering to equip!) the proper
equipment, and memorizing the best spells in advance.

That aside, here are other tactical pointers:

* If there is a choke point available, make use of it and force your enemies to
  come to you.  There won't always be one, but sometimes you will be confronted
  with many dozens of enemies and be endangered by sheer strength of numbers.

  You can also create choke points by paralyzing monsters with Sleep, Hold
  Person, or Stinking Cloud, then using their frozen bodies as meat shields.
  Vulnerable monsters will also not enter a Stinking Cloud, so you can
  directly use that spell to create or block a choke point.

* Have your fighters form a line.  Doing so prevents any of them from getting
  completely surrounded, and they can shield any more fragile characters behind
  them.

* If possible, anchor this line against walls or other terrain features.  This
  prevents enemies from surrounding and flanking the fighters at the end of the
  line.

* Most of the enemies in this game have no ranged attacks.  If there is space
  in between you and them, it is often better to "D"elay your move and let them
  close distance before making your own moves.

* Keep your primary cleric away from the front lines.  She may be heavily
  armored, but you don't want her to get disabled!  Cleric spells also cast
  slowly compared to magic-user spells, so clerics are more likely to get their
  spells interrupted by damage.

* The party member to be protected the most (primary cleric or single-classed
  magic-user) should be third-to-last in the order, as positions farther down
  are more vulnerable to being flanked.  Your better-armored fighters with the
  most hit points should all be in the top half.

* Avoid walking away from enemies you are in melee range of, because that gives
  them all free attacks of opportunity at a large bonus to hit.

  This bonus can easily be +7 right at the start of the game: you can lose a +4
  bonus to Armor Class from Dexterity, the +1 bonus from using a shield, and
  the standard +2 bonus on top of that for any back attack.

* If you are not in danger of being swarmed, you can get significant bonuses
  to hit with back attacks, and thieves can do huge damage with backstabs.
  These tend to leave your characters vulnerable, however, and backstabs don't
  happen as reliably as they do in later Gold Box games.

* A bow and arrows do significant damage, especially once you have a fine
  composite long bow, or are lucky enough to find a bow +2 or +3.  This is
  especially true early in the game, because you can shoot two arrows from a
  bow but only get one normal melee attack.

SECTION 5.2 - Magical Spell Strategy
------------------------------------

BEST SPELLS
The strongest combat spell in the early game is Sleep, by far.  This will
reliably knock out low-level living enemies in its square and in the eight
adjacent squares (including your own low-level characters, so aim properly).
Unlike many other spells, Sleep does not permit a saving throw.  You can then
dispatch sleeping foes at your leisure; any physical attack will eliminate
a sleeping enemy.

Sleep will rapidly lose effectiveness against more powerful enemies; it will
not work on anything with 6 or more levels or hit dice, so the strongest
enemies you can affect with it are things like ogres and level 4 fighters.

Fortunately, you will get two more strong disabling spells at level 3: the
2nd-level cleric spell Hold Person, and the 2nd-level magic-user spell Stinking
Cloud.  Hold Person will paralyze up to 3 humanoid enemies at medium range, and
Stinking Cloud creates a 2x2 cloud at short range that has a chance of
disabling vulnerable enemies within every round.  These should both be always
kept on hand once they become available.  Stinking Cloud can also be used to
block or create choke points, since vulnerable enemies will not enter one (the
AI does not have this deficiency in later Gold Box games).

When a magic-user reaches level 5, both Fireball and Lightning Bolt become
available.  Fireball is generally the better spell against the huge hordes of
monsters you encounter in this game.  Lightning Bolt is useful against smaller
numbers of targets, since you can bounce a bolt off a wall and hit a few
monsters twice, and monsters often spawn in straight lines.

Cure Light Wounds is the only curative spell you can cast in this game; the
number of healing potions you will find is very limited, it takes 24 hours to
recover a single hit point with normal rest, and it can take a long time to
return to a temple to heal.  So you always want multiple copies of this spell
prepared.  This spell is slow to cast, so you need to protect any clerics
casting this in the middle of combat.  (If you restart the game with a bunch
of characters with Constitution 22, this spell isn't as important, since you
will regenerate 3 hit points every hour.)

Protection from Evil, once you can spare the 1st-level spell slots for it,
provides significant protection for your characters in major combats.  The
clerical version lasts longer.

Prayer is a strong, general-purpose buff/debuff spell; it both improves THAC0
and saving throws for allies, and imposes penalties on enemies.

OTHER BUFF SPELLS
Bless can be cast from the start, and is a good way to subtly alter the odds in
your favor.  Additionally, it never becomes fully obsolete.

Spiritual Hammer is a good way for a single-classed cleric to gain a ranged
attack.  This isn't a worthwhile spell either in later games (where staff
slings become available), or if you are multi-classed with fighter (just use
a bow).

Enlarge will increase a character's strength, up to 18(00) cast at level 6.  It
isn't useful at low levels unless your fighters have especially low Strength,
but becomes strong at level 4-5.

Shield is somewhat useful later on, when you can spare a low-level spell slot
for a +1 bonus to all saving throws.

Invisibility will last forever until you actually do something that dispels the
invisibility, so it can be a great setup spell before a fixed combat.  You
can re-memorize and cast it repeatedly to make the whole party invisible, if
you are in a safe location.  (Cast it on yourself last.)

Mirror Image is a worthwhile protection spell, once you have enough 2nd-level
magic-user spell slots.  It's particularly good to cast against enemies with
dangerous melee attacks, like wyverns or level-draining undead.  However, it
does not function as well as it should, or as it does in later Gold Box games.

Blink is also a strong protection spell, though it's more useful in later Gold
Box games as 3rd-level magic-user spell slots are in such short supply here.
It also must be cast in combat, which makes actually protecting yourself with
it awkward.

Haste is a good spell to cast before major combats later in the game.  Casting
this will age every party member by 1 year, so you shouldn't cast it regularly.
You will eventually be able to purchase Elixirs of Youth in Pools of Darkness,
so this aging will be eventually reversible.  (Age starts to become an issue
once you receive this spell about 20 times as a human.)

These buffs are marginal or useless:
  * Protection from Good (there aren't many good enemies in this game, though
    there are a few important exceptions)
  * Resist Cold (nothing in this game can even inflict cold damage)
  * Resist Fire (few monsters in this game inflict fire damage, and there are
    several Rings of Fire Resistance)
  * Friends (this buff has too short a duration to be of much use)
  * Detect Invisibility (facing invisible enemies is rare in the Gold Box
    games)
  * Strength (Stinking Cloud is usually better, Mirror Image is a better buff
    for a 2nd-level magic-user spell, and eventually Enlarge always grants
    superior strength)
  * Invisibility 10' Radius, Protection from Evil/Good 10' Radius, and
    Protection from Normal Missiles (3rd-level magic-user spell slots have
    better uses)

OTHER DEBUFF SPELLS
Curse is a reasonable debuff for clerics to cast in major combats, though most
of the rest of the time you are better off with extra copies of Cure Light
Wounds.  It does affect monster morale, so it's useful against intelligent
opponents to convince them to surrender.  It also has a long casting delay.

Silence, 15' Radius is good for disabling spellcasting enemies.  It is
sometimes easier to get this to work by casting this on a weaker enemy next to
the enemy spellcaster you actually want to silence.

Charm Person is a decent combat use of 1st-level magic-user spell slots.  It
will only affect one enemy, however.  Its effectiveness partly arises from the
fact that a charmed enemy will absorb attacks that the party may have otherwise
taken.

Slow is a strong debuff spell to cast in late-game major combats, as it has a
wide area of effect.

These debuffs are marginal or useless:
  * Snake Charm (very specialized)
  * Cause Blindness, Cause Disease, and Bestow Curse (minimal effects, and all
    require two rolls for even that)
  * Reduce (does almost nothing)
  * Ray of Enfeeblement (not strong or reliable enough at low levels)

OTHER SPELLS
You should always keep Detect Magic on hand to identify valuable magical items.

Cause Light Wounds is slow to cast, must be cast in melee range, and requires
a melee attack roll, so it is not worthwhile to cast on monsters.  (If you are
exploiting the bug that a targeted combat spell can raise the dead, this still
can fail; Burning Hands works better.)

Slow Poison is marginally useful; it can revive anyone "killed" by poison for a
while, but if the effect expires the target will die for real.  This is not
worth casting unless you can get to a temple to cast Neutralize Poison in time.
It's not useless, though, since it's a way of reviving a character in the
middle of combat, which is otherwise not possible.

Cure Disease is something you should have prepared before fighting mummies
(which only appear in Valhingen Graveyard); disease can permanently drain
Strength quickly, fast enough that camping to prepare a copy of the spell after
you catch a disease is too slow.

Dispel Magic is useful for countering the effects of hostile charm or hold
spells.

Remove Curse is hardly ever useful; you should only memorize it when there is
a specific need for it.

Magic Missile does little damage at level 1, so it's not worth using compared
to Sleep then.  At later levels, Sleep loses effectiveness, and the guaranteed
accuracy of Magic Missile makes it a worthwhile use of 1st-level magic-user
spell slots.

Burning Hands and Shocking Grasp only work at close range, and aren't nearly as
good as Sleep at low levels, or Magic Missile at higher levels.  (By exploiting
a bug, Burning Hands can raise the dead.)

Knock is sometimes needed to get through a door; a few will resist most or all
attempts at either "B"ashing or "P"icking them.

SECTION 5.3 - Other Magical Strategy
------------------------------------

* Invisible characters will only be attacked by adjacent enemies, and can
  safely move away from enemies without triggering attacks of opportunity.
  Neither of these applies if the monster can see invisible.

* If everyone is invisible, and your opposition is neither able to see
  invisible nor in melee range, you can get a free round by "D"elaying with
  everyone until all the monsters have moved.

* The Dust of Disappearance is the most powerful consumable item in the game,
  as it will turn your entire party invisible in such a way that even attacking
  or spellcasting does not dispel the invisible effect.

* The Necklace of Missiles can cast fireballs.  It has a very limited number
  of charges normally, but if found as a random magical item it may have a very
  large number of charges.

* You will only rarely fight spellcasting enemies in Pool of Radiance.  If any
  have area attacks, you should instead scatter your party members so one spell
  can't take many of them out.  You can also inflict at least a little damage
  on such enemies, as if you inflict even one point of damage on a spellcaster
  it cannot cast a spell that round.

* If you turn undead, and an undead is turned but not outright destroyed, it
  will flee combat (often requiring chasing it down as it gets stuck in some
  corner), not simply vanish into thin air as happens in later Gold Box games.
  It takes a level 6 cleric to have any chance of destroying and not just
  turning undead, so avoid doing so against lesser undead.

* In major combats where you are forced to fight several battles consecutively,
  you do not have to actually end combat when asked; you can instead spend
  rounds casting Cure Light Wounds and extra buffs.

SECTION 5.4 - Tips for Specific Enemies
---------------------------------------

Basilisk - If you have everyone equip a mirror, you are fully protected from
  its petrifying gaze.

Bronze Dragon (controlled by the real Tyranthraxus) - Immune to all magic, so
  don't try casting spells at him.  Cast all buff spells beforehand: Dust of
  Disappearance, Enlarge, and Resist Fire last long enough that they can be
  cast before you fight his bodyguards.  Bless, Protection from Good, Mirror
  Image, Blink, Haste, and Prayer can be cast before ending the combat with his
  bodyguards.

  Resist Fire will halve the damage from Tyranthraxus's fire aura, and
  Protection from Good actually provides significant protection.

Drider - Casts dangerous magic-user spells; scatter your party to minimize
  Fireball damage and launch your own in return.

Fire Giant - Immune to fire damage, but vulnerable to Stinking Cloud.

Huge Scorpion - Has a deadly poison attack; vulnerable to Sleep.

Medusa - As with the basilisk, an equipped mirror fully protects from its
  petrifying gaze.

Mummy - Only appears in the Valhingen Graveyard, which is one reason you should
  delay that quest as long as possible.  They can paralyze characters with
  their fear aura, so it helps to cast all the buffs you can to boost saving
  throws before you start combat.  You must have magical weapons to hit them
  in physical combat, and even that doesn't work too well since all weapon
  strikes do half damage.  Mummies take extra damage from Fireball and
  sometimes take ridiculous damage from Lightning Bolt, so use those liberally.

Ogre - You can disable a single ogre with a Sleep spell, which will work about
  half of the time.

Phase Spider - You can attack these even after they phase out, if you attack
  by moving into them instead of with the "A"im command.  They have a
  dangerous poison attack that you can combat either with simple maximum
  offense (unleash all the Stinking Clouds and Fireballs you can), or with
  Mirror Image.

Spectre - Only appears in set combats, which is fortunate since you can cast
  buff spells before combat to mitigate its level-draining attack.  Requires
  magic or magical weapons to damage.  Turning undead is unlikely to work even
  with a level 6 cleric.

Troll - Sleep will not work, though Stinking Cloud very well might.  Trolls
  will regenerate and rise from the dead if you let too many rounds pass after
  killing them.  You can prevent this by either winning the combat quickly, or
  by having someone stand on top of where you killed the troll.  (Fire damage
  is supposed to prevent the regeneration, but it doesn't do that in this
  implementation.)

Vampire - Handle like a spectre, but you also want Charm Person or Dispel Magic
  to counter its charming gaze.

Wight - These level-draining undead can appear in large numbers; you want
  magical weapons and especially the Fireball spell to handle them.  Turning
  undead with a level 5 or 6 cleric also works well, if there are no
  lower-level undead present.

Wraith - Similar to a spectre; handle the same way.

Wyvern - These have deadly poison melee attacks; you should have Stinking Cloud
  (offensive) or Mirror Image (defensive) prepared on all magic-users.


SECTION 6.1 - Maps Introduction
-------------------------------

The maps in this section are in a suggested order of difficulty.  The council
will suggest missions as you solve them, but most missions can be done even if
not suggested, and you will still be fully rewarded for doing them.

No mission is absolutely necessary for solving the game, except for defeating
Tyranthraxus; there's nothing actually stopping you from going straight to the
final confrontation right from game start.

The second and third maps in Journal Entry 37 give an accurate overview of the
areas you can visit.

You will get the Valhingen Graveyard mission early compared to how difficult it
is.  It scales to Party Strength in difficulty, but it's still much easier at
higher levels, so it should be one of the last quests you undertake.

As the Wilderness has some monsters that are dangerous to lower-level
characters, it is described relatively late.

Enemies normally start right next to the party.  If distance 1 or 2 (squares
in the first-person view) is indicated, they will start farther way if there is
space.  Distance 1 generally can be closed by either side in one round;
distance 2 generally cannot.

Enemies will always start in front of the party; they do not flank or attack
from behind until the later VGA Gold Box games.

The size of monster groups, especially random encounters, will often be
adjusted for Party Strength.  The Party Strength calculation takes into account
current hit points, armor class, THAC0, and spellcasting ability, detailed in
the Party Strength section.

Monsters will also sometimes not appear simply because there isn't space for
them on the tactical map.  This can be exploited by forcing an encounter in a
dead end where the only exit is behind the party, holding down "Up" to generate
random encounters until they are exhausted.

Experience awards listed are per character, and assume you have exactly six
characters in your party, unless otherwise stated.

SECTION 6.2 - Civilized Area (New Phlan)
----------------------------------------

     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15       ECL Script 0,
   ########################################~~~~~~~~~        8 (council),
 0 #              #HC+  +HM#HF#HT+        #~~~~~~~~~  0     11 (training hall)
   #  #++#######  ####  ####++#++#  #######/////////
 1 #  #TE    TE+     +  +        #  # 1   +      E1/  1   KEY:
   #  #  #######     #  # 2      #  #++####/////////
 2 #  #  #           +  +        #        /~~~~~~~~~  2   # wall
   #  #  #           #############  #++#  //////////      / edge of dock
 3 #  #TE#       3                  #TE#           /  3   + door/archway
   #  #++#     #++#        ##########  #  //////////      ~ water
 4 +E2        3+12+ 3      +TE         #  /~~~~~~~~~  4
   ####++####  #  #######  #############  //////////      E  Entrance/exit
 5 #        +  #  + 4+ 6#        +10+              /  5   H  Training Hall
   ####  ####  #  #++####  ##########     //////////      IN Inn
 6 ####  #     # 5# 7   #  +TE      #     /~~~~~~~~~  6   SA Shop (arms/armor)
   ####  ####  #++####++#  ##########     //////////      SG Shop (general)
 7 #   11   +  #  +     #                          /  7   SJ shop (jeweler)
   ####  ####  #  #  8  #  #######++####  ####  ####      SS shop (special)
 8 ####  #     #  #     #  #  #   TA   #  #SA#  +SG#  8   TA Tavern
   ####  ####  #  ####++#  #  #  #######  #++#  ####      TE Temple
 9 #        +  #  +     #  +TA#  #                 /  9
   #++#  #++#  #  #  9  #  #######  #++#++#  ####++#
10 #  #  #     #  #     #  #SJ+SG+  #SS#SG#  #   TA# 10
   #  #++#     ##########  #######  #######  #######
11 #                       +SA#SG#  +SG#           / 11
   #++#  #++#  #++#  ####  ####++#  ####  ////  ####
12 #TE#  #TE#  #IN#  #IN+           +SA#  /~~/  #  # 12
   #  ####  #  #  #  #  #  #++####++####  /~~/  #  #
13 #        #  #  #  #  #  #SA   #SS#     /~~/  #  # 13
   ##########  ####  ####  ####++####     /~~/  #  #
14 #      IN+                             /~~/  +TA# 14
   ##########//////////////////////////////~~///####
15           ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~     15
             ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15

New Phlan is the recently-reclaimed section of Phlan.  Civilization's current
grip on the city is tenuous, with all the remaining sections of Old Phlan still
under monstrous control.  The current city's military has its hands full
simply maintaining the status quo; it is up to adventurers to reclaim more of
the city.

Preparation: First, buy melee weapons, armor, and shields.  Then, stay in an
  inn to memorize spells.  Next, go to the Phlan clerk's office to learn of the
  available commissions.  At first, only the quests to clear the Slums and
  Sokal Keep will be available and reachable.  If you are not familiar with the
  game, you should do the former quest first.

Random Encounters: None.  (In the tabletop version, the Boss will eventually
  orchestrate attacks on the city, and personally leads one, but that never
  happens here.)

Fleeing: Your party is moved to one of: (12,3); (10,10); (3,11); (2,0).

Resting: If you rest outside an inn, and you have not yet finished the game,
  the city guard will roust you out and force you to move on or fight them.
  The inns in the southwest cost 1 platinum to stay as long as you like.

City Guards: Tavern brawling, resting outside of an inn, forcing your way into
  Bishop Braccio's office, breaking into a shop or city hall building that is
  closed for the night, or having the MAD MAN randomly attack citizens will
  attract the attention of the city guard.

  You will have the option to "R"un to a random location, or "S"tay and
  fight them: 2 LEVEL 3 MU (#94), 12 6TH LEVEL FIGHTER (#84), 12 AIDES (#53),
  and 12 NOMAD (#40) (Morale 50, 5609 XP).  If you ever fight the city guards,
  all shops and temples will refuse service until you are rewarded for
  completing a mission.

  Some of the guards carry good magical items; once you are strong enough to
  defeat them and are just about to return to complete a mission, you can abuse
  this.  You can do this as soon as you have a significant number of characters
  with Hold Person and Stinking Cloud.  Defeating the city hall guards at
  location 5 will get you a ton of good magical equipment.  Defeating the
  warriors and clerics in the Temple of Tempus is difficult without Fireball,
  but that nets you  different good magical equipment and a lot of experience.

City Hall Guards: These are harder than regular city guards: 3 LEVEL 3 MU
  (#94), 6 AIDES (#53), 5 8TH LVL FIGHTER (#85), and [Party Strength] CORPORAL
  (#54) (Morale 99).

E1 - You are greeted here when you start the game.  Rolf will give you a brief
  guided tour, which will end at E2.  This is also where to depart for boat
  trips (boat trips do not take any time).

E2 - Exit to the Slums (15,4).  The guided tour also ends here.

  If you are carrying the Cadorna family treasure and it appears to be
  unopened, the city watch takes it from you and tells you to get the reward
  from the council clerk.

HC - Training Hall for clerics (costs 1000 gold).

HF - Training Hall for fighters (costs 1000 gold).

HM - Training Hall for magic-users (cost 1000 gold).

HT - Training Hall for thieves (costs 1000 gold).

IN - At these inns, you can pay 1 platinum to rest as long as you wish without
  interruption.  (If you've upset the town by fighting city guards, you will be
  told you are denied service, but you can stay and rest anyway.)

SA - Shop that sells weapons and armor.  You can buy all standard weapons and
  armor here.  The door at (9,14) works at night.

SG - Shop that sells general items.  You can buy mirrors, holy symbols, flasks
  of oil, and vials of holy water.

SJ - Shop that sells jewelry.  Jewelry serves no purpose except as a weight-
  efficient store of wealth.

SS - Shop that sells silver weapons and armor, and fine composite long bows.
  Every fighter should have a fine composite long bow once you can afford it.

TA - Tavern.  You can do several things here:
  (1) Listen to tavern tales, which can be any of the 23 tavern tales in the
      Adventurer's Journal.  Fewer than half of these tales have any value; the
      main ones that are useful are #1, #3, #8, and #23.  (And #9, if you are a
      fan of shattering the fourth wall.)
  (2) Gamble for money.  There is a 30% chance you will spin red and lose your
      money, and a 20% chance you will spin green and make a profit equal to
      your wager.  Whatever the outcome, a tavern fight cannot break out.
  (3) Get pickpocketed (chance is 26/256); the whole party loses 20% of its
      money and 5% of light items.  If you catch the pickpocket (50% chance)
      and choose to "G"rab the pickpocket, this will start a tavern brawl.
  (4) A tavern brawl erupts randomly (chance is 1/4 if you did not gamble).
      This will result in outright combat.  To determine enemies:
      1. Roll 1d2
      2. Add +1 if Party Strength is 25 or more, or +2 if 51 or more
      3. Fight 11 of each of the three groups below starting with that number:
         1: NOMAD (#40)
         2: 1ST LVL THIEF (#45)
         3: CORPORAL (#54)
         4: AIDES (#53)
         5: 4TH LVL FIGHTER (#41)
         6: 6TH LVL THIEF (#51)
      You also get 13 allies (Morale 50) from the above by rolling 1d4.
      There probably won't be room for all these brawlers.

      If you win the combat, you do not get the usual items; and then city
      guards will confront you.  (What I want to know: What kind of tavern has
      potentially lethal fights breaking out every few minutes?)

TE - Temple.  Healing services are available in exchange for a donation; see
  the section on Temple Spells for details.  The temple of Sune (in the
  northwest) does nothing else.  The temple of Tyr (in the northeast) will
  advise you to drop the MAD MAN if he is with you.

  Both will simply refuse service if you attack the city guards; in the temple
  of Tempus (in the southwest), if you have done so you will be attacked by:
  12 7TH LVL CLERIC (#83), 20 4TH LVL FIGHTER (#41), and 20 8TH LVL FIGHTER
  (#85) (Morale 99); all of these enemies are unlikely to actually fit on
  screen.  This battle will repeat every time you return to the temple of
  Tempus, until you mollify the city by completing a mission.

1 - Entrance to passenger dock.  This is where you select a destination for a
  boat trip.  At first, you can only travel to Sokal Keep, though it's free.
  Once you have cleared Sokal Keep, boat travel costs 1 platinum, and your
  destinations now are:
  * "S"okal Keep (8,14)
  * "E"ast to Wilderness (35,29)
  * "W"est to Wilderness (20,29)
  * North side of the "B"ay to Wilderness (26,27)

2 - This is where adventurers hang out.  You may do two things here:
  (1) You can have a character fight a duel.  This is always against a clone of
      your chosen character, so you never have great odds, and you can't clone
      equipment this way.  It's a fast way to get a few experience points right
      in the training hall, though.
  (2) You can also hire NPCs here, chosen from:
      *  6 in 48: SWORDSMAN (#36) (Morale 65), 3 shares
      * 10 in 48: WARRIOR (#103) (Morale 55), 1 share
      *  4 in 48: ACOLYTE (#108) (Morale 50), 1 share
      *  5 in 48: HERO (#109) (Morale 80), 4 shares plus some items
      *  4 in 48: THEURGIST (#110) (Morale 85), 4 shares plus some items
      *  6 in 48: ROBBER (#111) (Morale 70), 3 shares plus some items
      *  5 in 48: CURATE (#112) (Morale 75), 3 shares plus some items
      *  8 in 48: EVOKER (#122) (Morale 60), 2 shares

  If you do not get the NPC you want (there are 0-7 available), you can refresh
  available NPCs by simply leaving the map and returning.  The IBM version does
  not require you to reach level 2 before NPCs become available.

3 - Entrance to City Hall.  If Skullcrusher is with you, he will leave the
  party here.  Proclamations can be posted here, depending on the number of
  quests you have completed in the quest tracker (described below):
     0: LXIV, LXXVIII, CIX, and LIX
     1: CI
     2: CXXVI and CX
     3: CXXXIV
     4: CLIV
     5: CXIV
     6: CCIV
     7: CXXIX
     8: CCI
     9: CXIV
    10: LIX

4 - Council clerk's office.  In later games, she gets the name of Sasha.  You
  are told of commissions here, and can return here to receive rewards.  In
  most cases, you do not actually need to be told of the mission to perform and
  be rewarded for it.  Completing most commissions will remove any anger
  against the party.  The available commissions are the first three unresolved
  missions from this list:
  (1) Clear the slums immediately west of the Civilized Area.  Reward: 450 XP,
      1 jewelry, 50 platinum, 250 gold.
  (2) Clear Sokal Keep of its spectral guardians.  Reward: 1308 XP, 3 jewelry,
      250 platinum.
  (3) Return books, maps, and tomes with useful information.  This is resolved
      once you clear Mendor's Library (defeat the basilisk and spectre), not
      when you actually return all the books of interest.  Reward: 208 XP, 200
      platinum, 250 gold.  (In some versions of the game, you can never resolve
      this mission.  I haven't had a problem with version 1.3, but have with
      version 1.0.)
  (4) Discover what item is to be auctioned in Podal Plaza.  If you get close
      enough for the auction to begin, that is enough; you do not need to
      actually discover what the item is.  Reward: 208 XP, 200 platinum, 250
      gold.  (If you make a mistake, this mission cannot be resolved.)
  (5) Speak to Junior Councilman Porphyrys Cadorna, who has a mission; you
      must complete commission #2 to be asked this.  Reward: 833 XP, 20 gems.
  (6) Speak to Bishop Braccio, who has a mission (only asked once).  Completing
      that mission will be recognized here, but your only reward is praise and
      getting to keep any items you found in the temple; it will also not
      negate any anger caused by fighting the city guard, unlike all the other
      missions here.
  (7) Clear old Kovel Mansion of the thieves that operate there; you must
      complete commission #2 to receive this.  Reward: 191 XP, 3 gems, 80
      platinum.
  (8) Prevent the nomads from joining forces with Phlan's enemies.  Reward: 983
      XP, 2 jewelry, 6 gems.
  (9) Prevent the kobolds from joining forces with Phlan's enemies.  Reward:
      1041 XP, 25 gems.
  (10) Find the source of the Stojanow River's pollution and end it.  Reward:
      5708 XP, 15 jewelry, 250 platinum.
  (11) Prevent the lizardmen from joining forces with Phlan's enemies.  Reward:
      2466 XP, 5 jewelry, 15 gems, 50 gold.
  (12) Rescue the heir to the house of Bivant; this mission cannot be performed
      until it is offered, and you cannot receive it if commission #2 has not
      been completed.  Reward: 3208 XP, 5 jewelry, 25 gems, Two-Handed Sword
      +1, +3 Vs. Undead and 4 Clerical Scroll (Restoration, Restoration); if
      you instead failed the mission, the clerk complains about the failure.
  (13) Go on a diplomatic mission to the Zhentil Keep Outpost to the west.
      This mission cannot be performed until it is offered, which requires
      commission #5 to be resolved.  You will either first be asked to speak
      to Senior Councilman Porphyrys Cadorna by going through the south door,
      or be given the mission directly if you have learned that Cadorna is a
      traitor by visiting Valjevo Castle 26.  Reward: 2125 XP, 5 jewelry, 7
      gems; and if you have not already learned it, you are told that Porphyrys
      Cadorna is a traitor to New Phlan.  (You are also told he has a bounty
      upon his head, but none is actually paid.)
  (14) If you have completed commission #13: Head Councilman Urslingen has
      asked to speak with the party; go through the south door of Cadorna's old
      office.  Reward for his mission: 3666 XP, 10 jewelry.  After this, the
      next logical step is:
  (15) If you have completed commission #14: Lead the assault on Valjevo Castle
      and defeat Tyranthraxus, which wins the game.  Reward: 45000 XP, 100
      jewelry, 200 gems.

  The council clerk will eventually offer a special quest, if your party has
  Party Strength of at least 19 and has completed at least 4 quests in the
  quest tracker (described below).
  * If your Party Strength is 19 to 36: You are asked to clear the undead from
    Valhingen Graveyard.
  * If your Party Strength is at least 37: You are offered a formal commission
    to clear the graveyard.  If you accept, you get a treasure worth 333 XP
    containing a Two-Handed Sword +1, +3 Vs. Undead and 4 Clerical Scroll
    (Restoration, Restoration).
  You will receive rewards for defeating undead in the graveyard (the kill
  scores are described in the Valhingen Graveyard section):
  * 1 gold    : each new point of Skeleton Kill Score
  * 1 platinum: each new point of Zombie Kill Score
                1 for the juju zombie at Valhingen Graveyard 10
  * 1 gem     : each new point of Wight Kill Score
                1 for the giant skeleton at Valhingen Graveyard 3
  * 1 jewelry : each new point of Spectre Kill Score
                1 for the wraith at Valhingen Graveyard 13
  The final reward for clearing the graveyard is: 9791 XP, 25 jewelry, 15 gems.

  The council clerk also offers these other rewards:
  (1) Defeat Norris the Gray.  Reward: 208 XP, 200 platinum, 250 gold.
  (2) Retrieving specific books from Mendor's Library:
      (1) The Grand Historian's Records of the Arts of War.  Reward: 100 XP,
          120 platinum.
      (2) The History of the North.  Reward: 91 XP, 110 platinum.
      (3) Lex Geographica.  Reward: 83 XP, 100 platinum.
      (4) Fyerdetha's Discourses on Power.  Reward: 66 XP, 80 platinum.
      (5) Urgund's Description of Darkness.  Reward: 75 XP, 90 platinum.
      (6) The first of any of the other books from the library.  Reward: 0 XP,
          1 gold.
  (3) Clear Podal Plaza.  You cannot do this while commission #4 is unresolved.
      Reward: 208 XP, 200 platinum, 250 gold.
  (4) Clear the Cadorna Textile House.  Reward: 208 XP, 200 platinum, 250 gold.
  (5) Clear the Wealthy Area.  Reward: 249 XP, 3 gems, 99 platinum, and 250
      gold.

  The ten quests that advance the quest tracker are:
  (1) Commission #1 (clear the slums)
  (2) Commission #2 (clear Sokal Keep)
  (3) Commission #4 (auction in Podal Plaza)
  (4) Commission #7 (clear thieves from Kovel Mansion)
  (5) Commission #8 (prevent nomads from joining Tyranthraxus)
  (6) Commission #9 (prevent kobolds from joining Tyranthraxus)
  (7) Commission #10 (end pollution of the Stojanow River)
  (8) Commission #11 (prevent lizardmen from joining Tyranthraxus)
  (9) Clear Valhingen Graveyard
  (10) Defeat Norris the Gray

5 - The city hall guards bar you from passing here.  You can fight and defeat
  them, but they will eventually reappear.

6 - Junior Councilman's office.  Before you get commission #5, the city hall
  guard bars your way.  Junior Councilman Porphyrys Cadorna asks that you
  retrieve the family treasure from the Cadorna Textile House, south of Podal
  Plaza.

7 - Senior Councilman's office.  Before you get commission #13, the city hall
  guard bars your way.  Now-Senior Councilman Porphyrys Cadorna sends the party
  on a diplomatic mission to a Zhentil Keep outpost to the west of Phlan, with
  a sealed diplomatic packet that you are given.  (You are unable to actually
  open the packet, unlike in the tabletop version.)

8 - Head councilman's office.  Nothing happens here until you are rewarded for
  completing commission #13 and you are asked to visit here.  Then Werner von
  Urslingen greets you, and details a strategy to assault the Boss's fortress
  of Valjevo Castle.  This involves first capturing the Stojanow Gate that
  bars the only land route to the castle; the party is to capture the gate and
  hold it until armies from New Phlan can arrive.

9 - City countil chambers.

10 - Bishop Braccio's office.  Before he requests to speak to you (commission
  #6), the city guard bars your way.  Bishop Braccio then introduces you to
  Dirten, a cleric who has sworn to cleanse the temple of Bane on the other
  side of the river, and asks you to join forces to do so.  DIRTEN (#107)
  (Morale 99) can then join you as an NPC.

11 - Phlan City Park.

12 - If you found and opened the Cadorna family treasure in an obvious way,
  Junior Council Porphyrys Cadorna appears and rants at the party.

SECTION 6.3 - The Slums
-----------------------

     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15      ECL Script 20
   #################################################
 0 # 5~        #        + 4   #     #        #     #  0  KEY:
   ####  #++#++#        #     #     #        #     #
 1 #     #  #  #        #     #    2#       1+     #  1  # wall
   #++####  ####  ################++##########     #     ~ illusionary wall
 2 # 6#           +  3  #     +     +        +     #  2  + door/archway
   #  #  #######++####++#     ####++#######  #     #
 3 #  #  #    7#  #     +     #           #  #     #  3  E Entrance/exit
   ####  ####++#  #     #     #           #  #######
 4 +E2      #     +     #     #           #  #   E1+  4
   #######  #++#  ##########++#++##########++#++####
 5 #  +11#  # 8#           #  #     #        #     #  5
   #  ####  ####     #######  #     #        #     #
 6 #  #     +        #     #  #     #        #     #  6
   #  ####++##########     #  #     #        #     #
 7 #10#        #     +     +  #     #        +     #  7
   #++#        #     ####  ####++###################
 8 #  +    9   +        #  #  #                    #  8
   #  #        #######  ####  #     ##########     #
 9 #  #        #     #        #     #        #     #  9
   #  ####++####     #        #     #        #     #
10 #        #  + 13  #E3      #     #      14+     # 10
   #        #  #     #++############################
11 +E2      +12#     #     #           #           # 11
   ###################  #############  #++#++#++####
12 #     #              #        #  +  +  #  #  +15# 12
   ####  #  ##########  #     #++#  ####  #  #  ####
13 #  #  #  #        #  #     #  #  +  #  #  +     # 13
   #  #++#++#++#  #++#  ####++#++#  ####  #  #     #
14 #16#        #  #           #        #  +  #     # 14
   #++#  ####++#  ##########++#######++#  #  #######
15 #     #              #     #           #        # 15
   #################################################
     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15

The Slums are for the most part the easiest area in the game to clear, with the
notable exception of the ogre/troll combat in the southwest of the map.  Most
combats here can be won with the help of Sleep spells cast in the midst of
clumps of monsters.

Random encounters: There are a total of 15 random encounters in the Slums.

  The chance of a random encounter is determined as follows:
                               Outside Rope Guild   Inside Rope Guild
                               ------------------   -----------------
  Base Probability                        1 in 14             2 in 11
  If in Search Mode                   add 4 in 14         add 2 in 11
  If gypsy at location 8 killed       add 5 in 14         add 3 in 11

  The number of base monsters in a random encounter is calculated from Party
  Strength:                       Outside Rope Guild   Inside Rope Guild
                                  ------------------   -----------------
  Normal number of monsters       [Party Str] * 2/3    [Party Str]
  If gypsy at location 8 killed   add 5                add 10

  The encounters are composed of one the following (equal probability):
                  Base Number  Leaders
    Base Monster  For Leaders  (+5 Morale if present)  Movement
    ------------  -----------  ----------------------  --------
    KOBOLD (#0)             8  3 KOBOLD LEADER (#1)           6
    GOBLIN GUARD (#2)       8  4 GOBLIN LEADER (#3)           6
    ORC (#4)               14  4 ORC LEADER (#5)              9

  1 BUGBEAR (#63) will lead the monsters (+15 Morale) if the number of base
    monsters is 19 or higher.

  Surprise is rolled for the party and the monsters; the monsters start at
  Distance 2 unless both sides are surprised.  You get the standard options of
  "C"ombat, "W"ait, "F"lee, "A"dvance/"P"arley:
  * Party and monsters both surprised: 'You bump into' each other; "W"ait
    causes the monsters (base Morale 50) to always flee.
  * Party surprised, monsters not: the monsters immediately attack (base Morale
    70).
  * Party not surprised, monsters surprised: "W"ait causes the monsters (base
    Morale 30) to always flee.
  * Party and monsters both not surprised:
    * 50% chance: the monsters are 'angry' (base Morale 60); "W"ait or "P"arley
      always result in combat.  "F"lee success depends on the movement of the
      slowest party member compared to the monsters.
    * 50% chance: the monsters are 'seedy-looking' (base Morale 40); "W"ait
      always causes the monsters to flee.

  To determine the result of a "P"arley that did not immediately result in
  combat, start with the number from the base number of monsters and the parley
  attitude you chose:

                ------------ Parley Style -------------
  Base Number   Haughty     Sly    Nice    Meek Abusive
  -----------   ---------------------------------------
  below 9             9      19      19      19      29
  9 to 15             4      14      14       9      24
  16 or above        -1       9       9      -1      14

  Add 1d31, and also your spokesperson's Charisma reaction modifier; then:
  * Score is below 65: the monsters attack with a +20 bonus to Morale.
  * Score is 65 to 74: the monsters attack.
  * Score is 75 to 85: 'The monsters respond, "Da boss don't like youse guys.
    Give us sumptin an maybe we'll ferget we seen yas."'
    * "P"ay: This only works if your offer in gold numerically at least equals
      this random encounter's strength, and you then lose half your remaining
      money anyway.
    * "S"urrender: Your party loses all of its money and light items, and some
      heavier items.
    * "R"un: Success depends on the party member with the lowest movement
       compared with the monsters' movement.
    * "F"ight: Starts combat.
  * Score is 86 to 95: 'The leader speaks, "The boss don't allow your kind in
    his territory.  Leave now or we'll have to run you in."'
    * "F"ight or "S"tay: Starts combat.
    * "L"eave: Always works; party stays on current square.
    * "R"un: Always works; party moves to another location as "F"lee.
  * Score is 96 or above: '"Let me give you a piece of advice," their leader
    says.  "Stay away from the textile house.  The undead are going crazy up
    there."  The monsters turn to leave.'
    * "L"et them go: Always works; party stays on current square.
    * "S"top them: Starts combat.

  Once all 15 random encounters have been defeated in combat, they will never
  again occur here.

Fleeing: Your party is moved to one of: (15,4); (14,6); (11,2); (11,5); (9,2).

Resting: You may safely rest either in a room where you have defeated a set
  encounter, or anywhere if you have cleared the block.  It is never safe if
  you have killed the gypsy at location 8.  If you are interrupted (if
  possible, the chance is 24% every 2 hours) it will be by the same monsters as
  for a random encounter (even if you have killed all the actual random
  encounters).

Clearing the block: You must defeat in combat all 15 random encounters, defeat
  all 9 set encounters (locations 1, 2, 4, 6, 7, 10, 11, 12, and 16), and deal
  with Ohlo at location 14 (by either resolving his quest or killing him) to
  clear the Slums.

Differences from the tabletop adventure: The tabletop adventure Slums have
  already more or less been cleaned out.

E1 - Exit to Civilized Area (0,4).  If you get text saying that you hear an

  alarm, then the block has not yet been cleared.

E2 - Exit to Kuto's Well.

E3 - Entrance to the Old Rope Guild.  In this part of the map, the automap does
  does not work, and random encounters are more frequent and difficult.

1 - 1 ORC (#13) and 3 ORC (#4) are arguing over papers here; they immediately
  attack (Morale 99, 77 XP).  The papers include a Clerical Scroll (Cure Light
  Wounds, Cure Light Wounds).

2 - 1 GOBLIN LEADER (#12) leads 8 GOBLIN GUARD (#2) in attacking you (Morale
  60, 90 XP).  Among the loot is Leather Armor +1.

3 - Stables.  Searching this room yields a leather bag worth 233 XP containing
  2 gems, 100 gold, 20 Arrows +1, and a Short Bow +1.

4 - A group of 1 KOBOLD LEADER (#11) and 15 KOBOLD (#0) attacks you (Morale 60,
  289 XP).  The leader carries Bracers AC 6.

5 - Hidden in this secret room is a treasure worth 1173 XP containing 2
  jewelry, 4 gems, 50 platinum, 92 gold, 1000 electrum, 20 Arrows +1, and a
  Short Bow +1.

6 - 5 HOBGOBLIN (#6) are arguing over a pile of gold and immediately attack
  you (Morale 75).  After combat, you can search to find their treasure, worth
  258 XP, containing 50 platinum, 500 gold, a Ring of Protection +1, and a
  Short Bow +1.

7 - A group of 1 ORC LEADER (#15), 3 ORC LEADER (#14), and 16 ORC (#4) are
  angry at your intrusion and attack you (Morale 70, 412 XP).  The loot
  includes 3 Broad Swords +1, a Chain Mail +1, and a Flail +1.

8 - A gypsy lives here.  You can either have her tell your fortune, or attack
  her, which automatically kills her and gets you 3 copper, but makes random
  combats in the Slums more frequent and difficult.  (If you want to be a
  murder hobo, there are far more effective ways of being one.)  The three
  fortunes you can receive depend on how far in the game you have gotten:
  * "Blood and violence are writ boldly in your future.  Look for friends where
    you expect enemies and enemies where you expect allies."
  * "A powerful one becomes aware of your deeds and seeks to destroy you.  A
    weak one sees you as a path to power."
  * "The time is nigh when the paths you have trod will empty and you must seek
    new ways.  The riddle's answer is great evil using great good for great
    evil."

9 - If the block has not yet been cleared, you can hear skulking monsters
  drop hints about other places in the slums here:
  * "... the gang is operating from the catacombs by the well ..."
  * "... the temple over the river is run by some hot-shot orc ..."
  * "... there is a secret treasure room in the NW corner ..."

10 - The guards in this room, 2 ORC LEADER (#5) and 30 ORC (#4) intercept you
  (Morale 60, 99 XP).

11 - You are attacked by the monster leaders in this room: 1 OGRE (#8), 2
  GNOLL (#73), 2 HOBGOBLIN LDR (#7) (Morale 80, Distance 1, 63 XP).

12 - You are attacked by the guards in this room: 11 GOBLIN LEADER (#3) and 12
  GOBLIN GUARD (#2) (Morale 60, 65 XP).

13 - This apparently empty room can be searched for the goblins' treasure
  worth 383 XP, containing 2 gems, 200 platinum, a Shield +1 and a Magic-User
  Scroll (Magic Missile).

14 - The magic-user Ohlo is here.  Attacking him, or parleying with "H"aughty
  or "A"busive, results in an attack by: 1 LEVEL 3 MU (#94), 2 ORC LEADER (#5),
  8 ORC (#4), 25 HOBGOBLIN (#6) (Morale 99, Distance 1).  Parleying with "N"ice
  or "M"eek results in Ohlo asking you to retrieve a potion from the Old Rope
  Guild for him in return for a payment.

  If you return with the potion from location 15, "A"sking for more money or
  "R"efusing to give it to him causes him to attack you; if you "G"ive him the
  potion, he gives you a reward worth 558-691 XP containing 1 jewelry, 150
  platinum, and 1 random magical item.  (There are not many places in the game
  where you can find random magical items, and there are some very good items
  you can only get as a roll for a random magical item, so if you are patient
  you can try rolling for something good.)

15 - A merchant apologizes that he has nothing.  "A"ttacking him results in
  combat with 8 HOBGOBLIN (#6) (Morale 99), which causes the merchant to
  disappear for good (though this still counts as dealing with Ohlo for
  clearing the block).  If you "S"peak and give the name of OHLO, he gives you
  a package (which is not an inventory item).

16 - 4 TROLL (#31) and 2 OGRE (#8) stop tossing sacks of grain and try to toss
  you instead (Morale 75, 1222-1422 XP).  Defeating them gets you their
  treasure of 1 jewelry, 50 platinum, 40 gold, and 3 random magical items.

  This can be won even if all you've done is clear the rest of the Slums.  Cast
  Bless before engaging.  The Sleep spell can knock out an ogre; knock out both
  ogres this way.  Let the sleeping ogres bar the way of the trolls in the back
  while you focus fire on the troll in front; your primary cleric should stand
  behind to cast cure spells as needed.  Once the front troll is down, stand on
  its body so it can't revive.  Then step away from the ogre on the left and
  slay it with an arrow.  The other ogre's sleeping body is enough to block the
  other three trolls from reaching you.  Pick off the trolls in the back with
  bows and arrows; avoid focusing fire, as you don't want an unconscious troll
  to rise with full hit points.  You may need to refresh the sleep spell on the
  remaining ogre as you are doing this.  With 4-5 fighters and thieves firing
  arrows, it shouldn't take long to knock out the trolls in the back.

  If your party is weak enough that the above isn't enough to win, you can just
  return once one of your magic-users learns Stinking Cloud.  It may be worth
  delaying this fight anyway, since 3 random magical items is an opportunity
  that doesn't happen again for a long time, and you might want to wait until
  you can easily win this battle to reroll the treasure at your leisure.

SECTION 6.4 - Sokal Keep
------------------------

     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15      ECL Script 21
   #################################################
 0 ##################################### 9      +  #  0  KEY:
   #####################################        ####
 1 #####################################           #  1  # wall
   ##############################################~~#     ~ illusionary wall
 2 #           #        +     +        +           #  2  + door/archway
   #           #        #     #        #           #
 3 #           #    7   #     #        #           #  3  E Entrance/exit
   ####        #        #     #        #        #++#
 4 ####        #        #     #        #        #  #  4
   ####     #############  6  #############     ####
 5 #        ####        +     +        ####        #  5
   ####++#######        #++#++#        #######++####
 6 #        #           #     #           #       5#  6
   #        #        ####     ####        #        #
 7 #        #        #  #     #  #        + 4      #  7
   ####  #######     #~~#     #~~#     #######  ####
 8 ####  +     #     #           #     #######  ####  8
   ####  #  3  #     #  #######  #     #############
 9 ####  #     #     #           #     #######  ####  9
   ####  #######     #~~#     #~~#     #######  ####
10 #        #        #  #  8  #  #        +        # 10
   #        #        #############        #        #
11 #       2#                             #        # 11
   #######++####  ####           ####  #############
12 ####        +  ####           ####  +        #### 12
   ####        ##########+++++##########        ####
13 #              #### 1         ####              # 13
   #              ####           ####              #
14 #                 #           #                 # 14
   ####  #######  ####           ####  #######  ####
15 ####  #######  ####   E1 E1   ####  #######  #### 15
   ######################+++++######################
     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15

Sokal Keep, last bastion of humanity when Phlan fell years ago, is now haunted
by undead that serve neither New Phlan nor the Boss.  Spirits disrupt shipping
to and from New Phlan, so it would be beneficial for New Phlan to somehow get
rid of them.  It is in the interest of the Boss to prevent this.

Random encounters: In the courtyard around the inner keep, the chance of a
  random encounter is 1 in 6, with no surprise possible.  The patrols will
  leave you alone if you "P"arley (attitude does not matter) and say SHESTNI
  before you have completed the mission, or SAMOSUD after you have completed
  the mission.

  "C"ombat or giving the wrong word starts combat with 6 SKELETON (#34) and 6
  ZOMBIE (#35) (Morale 99, 59 XP).  If you defeat 4 such patrols in combat, you
  will encounter no more patrols during the current visit.  If you leave the
  Keep, the patrols return to full strength, even if Ferran Martinez has been
  dealt with.

Fleeing: Your party is moved to one of: (4,11); (7,l4); (8,11); (8,13).

Resting: You may safely rest anywhere if the four undead patrols have been
  defeated in combat.  The patrols may disturb rest otherwise.

Clearing the block: Once the spectral Ferran Martinez has been told the truth
  about Phlan being reclaimed, or has been defeated in combat, the spirits will
  dissipate and no longer disrupt shipping.  The undead patrols can never be
  permanently eliminated.

Differences from the tabletop adventure: "Sokol" Keep doesn't have the de facto
  copy protection on the elf skeleton, and has a different layout with added
  green slime and ochre jelly, but many of the other details are the same.  The
  undead patrols are supposed to help the party against the orc/hobgoblin
  ambush.

E1 - Exit to Civilized Area (15,1), via boat.

1 - Skeleton of a long-dead elf.  If you search, you find a parchment with
  Espruar runes reading "LUX", "SHESTNI", and "SAMOSUD".

2 - 2 HUGE SCORPION (#39) (Morale 99, 63 XP) attack you here.  They have lethal
  poison attacks which can only be truly fixed with a Neutralize Poison spell
  cast at a temple back in Phlan.

3 - You can't do anything with the fungus in this room.  (You can eat it for
  a temporary buff in the tabletop version, though I'm not sure who would want
  to try eating fungus growing in a haunted keep.)

4 - 4 POISONOUS FROG (#38) (Morale 50, Distance 2, 26 XP) live in this former
  smithy, and will attack you if they notice you.  Like the scorpions, they
  have lethal poison attacks (though against these, you get a +4 bonus to
  saving throws).

5 - If you search here you will find one intact item: a Hammer +1 (66 XP).

6 - The first time you enter one of these four squares, a force of 4 ORC LEADER
  (#5), 15 HOBGOBLIN (#6), and 31 ORC (#4) (Morale 50, Distance 1, 187 XP)
  attacks you.  On the corpse of one of the hobgoblins, you will find a note
  (Journal Entry 57).

  You get the best tactical positioning if you enter through the southeastern
  door.  Cast Bless before entering.  There is a 3-square-tall choke point
  behind where your characters start; retreat there even if it means turning
  your back to a few orcs.  Form a defensive line behind the choke point and
  let the horde come to you.  Only the orc leaders can actually launch ranged
  attacks, and they run out of arrows in 4 rounds, so don't worry about taking
  too much arrow fire.  Once the horde comes close you can launch Sleep and
  Hold Person spells and pick off disabled foes.  If you kill half the horde,
  it will start checking morale.

  If you still have trouble, it helps to hire 2 heroes in the New Phlan
  training hall just for this one battle.

7 - This room is where the spectres of the keep's original defenders haunt.
  They cannot be successfully attacked, nor will they attack you.  Parleying
  only has an effect if you speak the word "LUX", which will cause them to talk
  about how their spirits were bound inadvertently to the keep, and point you
  to a hidden spot (which you cannot find yourself) with a diary (Journal Entry
  3) plus a treasure worth 208 XP containing 5 gems.

8 - Altar of the central chapel.  A less-scary-than-usual spectre will confront
  the party.  You can fight FERRAN MARTINEZ (#19) (Morale 99, 338 XP), who is
  alone, to successfully complete the mission, but he is a very dangerous
  level-draining undead.  It is easier to parley with him, say "LUX", then
  "T"ell the truth, which is the only way to get a response out of him.  He
  will tell you about how Phlan of old fell to creatures imbued with the might
  of a magical pool; that the sage Mendor tried to gather records that would
  help fight them, but was overrun; about the treasure at location 9 if you
  haven't yet found it; and how to deal with the patrols on the way out.  He
  will then leave, satisfied that his purpose is done; this will also complete
  the mission.

9 - Hidden in the corner behind an illusionary wall in the armory are surviving
  magical weaponry and armor worth 333 XP: Shield +1, Long Sword +1, Chain Mail
  +1, Mace +2.

SECTION 6.5 - Kuto's Well
-------------------------

     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15      ECL Script 29
   #################################################
 0 ####    1   +  #     '     #  1  '  #     #     #  0  KEY:
   #############  #     #  1  #''''''  #     #     #
 1 #  +           '  1  #     #        #     #     #  1  # wall
   #  ##########  #     #++#######     ####++####++#     ' rubbled wall
 2 #     #     #  #     #  '  1  +        #     #  #  2  + door/archway
   #     #  1  #  ####++#  ''''''#        #     #  #
 3 #     #     +        #                 #     #  #  3  E Entrance/exit
   #############     #############        #++####++#
 4 +E2             2c#2b 2b 2b 2b 2c 2c          E1+  4
   #############     ####''#######''#######  #######
 5 #     +     +      2c'2c 2c 2c 2c+2b 2c#  #     #  5
   #     #     #'''     '''         #     #  #     #
 6 #     +     +  '      2a       2c#2b 2c#  +     #  6
   #############  '     #++#        #     ##########
 7 #     +2b#2c       2a+E4+2a    2c+2b 2c#        #  7
   #     #  #           #++#     '''#######        #
 8 #     +2b+2c          2a       2c 2c   #        #  8
   #############++#++#  ''''     #######  #++#     #
 9 #     #     +     +  '  '   2c#2b   #     #     #  9
   #++#######  #++#++#  ''''  #++#     #     #######
10 #  +     #               2c+2b 2b   #           # 10
   #++#     #     #######++#######     #     ''''  #
11 +E2#     +     #     #  #     #     #     '  'E1+ 11
   #++#     #     #     #  #     #######     ''''''#
12 #  #     #     #     +  +     #              +  # 12
   #++#######     #######++#######              #++#
13 #  #           #       3      #              #  # 13
   #++#  #######  #  ####++####  #     #++#######  #
14 #  #  #     #  #  #    4   #  #     #  #        # 14
   #  #++#     #  #  #        #  #     #  #        #
15 #     +     +E3#  #        #  #   E3#  #        # 15
   #############++###################++#############
     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15

Kuto's Well is the most prominent source of fresh water within Phlan, so many
of the current resident monsters visit it frequently.  The area is, among
monsters, something of a neutral zone.  Your party is not seen as neutral,
though.  Also, the bandit Norris the Gray hides out here and doesn't tolerate
attempts to find or enter his hideout.

Random encounters: There are 10 random encounters around Kuto's Well; the
  chance of a random encounter 1 in 11, or 3 in 11 if you are in Search Mode.

  The monsters (equal probability of the below) default to a base number equal
  to Party Strength:                                        Base
    Base Monster    Modifier                              Morale  Movement
    ------------    ------------------------------------  ------  --------
    KOBOLD (#0)     also 3 KOBOLD LEADER (#1)                 50         6
    LIZARDMAN (#57) divide number by 8 (minimum 1)            90        12
    GNOLL (#73)     divide number by 6 (minimum 1)            75         9

  Surprise is rolled for the party and the monsters; the monsters start at
  Distance 2 unless both sides are surprised.  You get the standard options of
  "C"ombat, "W"ait, "F"lee, "A"dvance/"P"arley:
  * Party and monsters both surprised: 'You are suddenly face to face' with
    each other.  "W"ait causes the monsters to flee.
  * Party surprised, monsters not surprised: the monsters immediately attack.
  * Party not surprised, monsters surprised: "W"ait causes the monsters (-20
    penalty to Morale) to flee.
  * Party and monsters both not surprised:
    * 50% chance: the monsters are 'bloodthirsty' (+9 bonus to Morale);
      "W"ait or "P"arley always result in combat.  "F"lee success depends on
      the movement of the slowest party member compared to the monsters.
    * 50% chance: 'You are being avoided' by the monsters (-10 penalty to
      Morale); "W"ait causes the monsters to flee.

  If you "P"arley, and it doesn't immediately result in combat: "H"aughty is
  worth a base score of 9; "S"ly, "M"eek, and "N"ice are worth 19; "A"busive
  is worth 29.  Then, add 1d31 plus your spokesperson's Charisma reaction
  modifier.
  * Score is less than 95: You offend the monsters, and they attack (Morale
    99).
  * Score is 95 or more: '"We have to keep this area free of intruders --
    Boss's orders.  We'll let you go this time.  But if you come back, you'll
    face big trouble."  The monsters leave.'

  Once all 10 random encounters have been defeated in combat, they will never
  occur again here.

Fleeing: Your party is moved to one of: (13,12); (2,9); (11,3); (1,1); (13,7);
 (1,14); (10,13); (6,5).

Resting: You cannot safely rest here until you have defeated all 10 random
  encounters; defeating Norris the Gray does not affect this, contrary to what
  the clue book claims.  If rest is not safe, every hour there is a 12% chance
  you are disturbed by a random encounter, in which both you and monsters are
  surprised.

Clearing the block: There is no reward or recognition for clearing this block,
  other than making resting here safe.

Differences from the tabletop adventure: The map layout is similar but not
  quite the same; the hag and her treasure only exist in the Gold Box version.

E1 - Exit to the Slums.

E2 - Exit to Podal Plaza.

E3 - Exit to Mendor's Library.

E4 - Kuto's Well; entrance to Kuto's Well Catacombs (7,7).

1 - In one of these rooms, you may find a small group of kobolds that tries to
  edge away from you.  If you parley with them, they tell you they are what is
  left of a large scouting party sent by their king, who had heard rumors of
  a wondrous pool.  If you fight them, you fight 2 KOBOLD (#0) and 4 KOBOLD
  LEADER (#1) (Morale 25).

2 - Some of Norris the Gray's kobolds patrol the well and the buildings near it
  to prevent anyone from entering his hideout.  Attack is automatic if you face
  the well at 2a, or if you enter one of the buildings near the well at 2b.  It
  also sometimes happens at sometimes at 2c (always if you search).

  If they attack, you fight 6 KOBOLD (#0) and 3 KOBOLD LEADER (#1) (Morale 67);
  a second identical combat ensues immediately afterward as reinforcements
  emerge from the well.

3 - A patrol of 1 LIZARDMAN (#57) and 4 GIANT LIZARD (#59) (Morale 75, 99 XP)
  guard the door here.

4 - A hag greets you and gives you some advice about how an evil spirit guides
  your enemies, then leaves.  If you then search, you will find beneath a rug
  a hidden treasure worth 533 XP: Banded Mail +1, Quarter Staff +1, Bracers AC
  4.

SECTION 6.6 - Kuto's Well Catacombs
-----------------------------------

     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15      ECL Script 29

 0                                                    0  KEY:
                                       #######
 1                                     #    4#        1  # wall
                              ##########     #           + door/archway
 2                            #              #        2  ~ secret door
      ##########              #     ##########
 3    #        #              #    3#                 3  E Entrance/exit
      #        ################  #++#
 4    #           +        +     #  #                 4
      #        ####        #######  #
 5    # 3      #### 3      #######  #                 5
      #++##########  #############++#
 6    #  ##########  ##########     #                 6
      #  ##########  ##########     ##########
 7    #  ########## 2####E1####              #        7
      #  ##########~~####++####  ####        #
 8    #  ########## 2    1a####  ####        #        8
      #  #############     ####  ####++#######
 9    #        #######     +     ####  #              9
      #        #######     ##########  #
10    #   1c   ####        ##########  #             10
      ####++#######  ####  ##########++#
11       #  #######  #  #  +           #             11
         #  #######++#  ##########     #
12       #  #######  #           #     #             12
         #++#######  ####        #######
13       #     1b       #                            13
         ####        ####
14          #  1b    #                               14
            ##########
15                                                   15

     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15

The half-orc bandit Norris the Gray and his bandit horde hide out here.

Random encounters: None.

Resting: If you have defeated Norris the Gray, resting is always safe.
  Otherwise, he will ambush you himself (same confrontation as in location 2).

Clearing the area: Though the council does not give you a mission for it, it
  will give you an award for defeating Norris the Gray.

Differences from the tabletop adventure: The ambushes are more complicated in
  the tabletop version, though the map is similar.

E1 - Exit to Kuto's Well (7,7).

1 - If Norris the Gray has not been defeated, skulking kobolds launch arrows
  (THAC0 21 attacks on random characters, 1d6 damage per hit; 4 attacks at 1a,
  one at 1b and 1c) at your party here.  You cannot reach the kobolds from this
  location.

2 - This secret door is not usable unless you detect it.

3 - If Norris the Gray has not been defeated, he will confront you at the first
  of these locations you reach.  (He's familiar enough with the catacombs to
  beat you to any of them.)  If you "S"urrender, you lose all your money and
  light items plus some heavier items, and you are moved above ground.  If you
  "F"ight, it is against NORRIS THE GRAY (#32), 5 LIZARDMAN (#57), and 9
  KOBOLD LEADER (#1) (Morale 70, 208 XP).

  Norris the Gray carries a Long Sword +1; on his body you will find a message
  (Journal Entry 50).

4 - Here you find Norris the Gray's treasure hoard worth 867 XP, containing 20
  gems, 92 gold, and 2300 silver.

SECTION 6.7 - Mendor's Library
------------------------------

     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15      ECL Script 15
   #############++###################++#############
 0 #            E1                   E1            #  0  KEY:
   #                                               #
 1 #                        E3                     #  1  # wall
   #     ###################XX###################  #     + door/archway
 2 #     #  +  #        #        #        #  +  #  #  2  X locked door
   #     #  ####  ####  #        #  ####  ####  #  #
 3 #     #  +  #  ####  #        #  ####  #  +  #  #  3  E Entrance/exit
   #     #  ####  ####  #        #  ####  ####  #  #
 4 +E2   #  +  #    1   #        #    3   #  +  #  #  4
   #     #  #######++#######++#######++#######  #  #
 5 #     #                                      #  #  5
   #     ####++####++#++#++#  #++#++#++####++####  #
 6 #     #    2   #  #  #  #  #  #  #  #    4   #  #  6
   #     #  ####  ##########  ##########  ####  #  #
 7 #     #  ####  #        +  +        #  ####  #  #  7
   #     #  ####  #        #  #        #  ####  #  #
 8 #     #        #        #  #        #        #  #  8
   #     ###################++###################  #
 9 #     #              +        #5a   #        #  #  9
   #     #              #######  #++####        #  #
10 #     #              #   5b+        + 8      #  # 10
   #     #              #######        #        #  #
11 +E2   #       6      #    7+        #        #  # 11
   #     #              #     #        ##########  #
12 #     #              #     #       9+        #  # 12
   #     #              #     #  #++####        #  #
13 #     #              #     #  #5c   #   10   #  # 13
   #     ######################XX################  #
14 #                           E3                  # 14
   #                                               #
15 #                                               # 15
   #################################################
     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15

Mendor's Library was one of the foremost centers of knowledge in the Moonsea
region before Phlan's fall.  In Phlan's last days, Mendor tried to build up
knowledge to thwart the fall, but failed.  The monsters don't know what to do
with the books, but the Boss does want the information therein -- but the
Flight of the Dragons two years ago seriously distracted him.

Preparation: Before you come here, equip as many party members as possible
  with magical weapons (+1 is good enough) and mirrors, and have the Knock
  spell prepared.  If you don't have Knock yourself, you can hire a THEURGIST
  in the Phlan training hall.  Be wary of dismissing the NPC within the library
  as it is possible to lock yourself inside if you cannot cast Knock yourself.

Random encounters: None.

Fleeing: Your party is moved to one of: (7,9); (5,5); (9,9); (9,11).

Resting: It is safe to rest anywhere.

Clearing the block: The block is considered cleared once you defeat both the
  basilisk and the spectre, even if you have not recovered all the books of
  interest.

Differences from the tabletop adventure: "Mantor"'s library has a very
  different layout and different treasure and monsters, though the specific
  books of interest have the exact same text.

E1 - Exit to Kuto's Well.

E2 - Exit to Cadorna Textile House.

E3 - Entrance to Mendor's Library.  You need the Knock spell to get in here at
  a low level; even Strength 18(00) or a high-level thief are not good enough
  to "B"ash or "P"ick this door reliably.

  If you attempt to leave the library having taken at least 1 book, the first
  time you do so you are attacked by the SPECTRE (#17) (Morale 100, 338 XP)
  guarding the library.  It has a dangerous level-draining attack; casting
  Protection from Evil on everyone before the combat begins helps prevent it
  from landing.  You can restore drained levels with the scroll found at
  location 1.

1 - Rhetoric section.  You will encounter 1 BASILISK (#26) (Morale 100) here;
  it cares not for rhetoric so parleying won't have any effect.  Winning yields
  541 XP and a treasure of Potion of Giant Strength, Potion of Healing, Cloak
  of Displacement, Clerical Scroll (Restoration, Restoration).  There are no
  books of interest in this section.

2 - Mathematics section.  There are no books of interest in this section.

3 - History section.  Searching this area will yield the following books you
  may take:
  (1) The Grand Historian's Records of the Arts of War (Journal Entry 21).
  (2) The History of the North (Journal Entry 8).
  (3) Lex Geographica (Journal Entry 37).

4 - Philosophy section.  Searching this area will yield the following books you
  may take (the last five are nearly worthless):
  (1) Fyerdetha's Discourses on Power (Journal Entry 7).
  (2) Urgund's Description of Darkness (Journal Entry 19).
  (3) Meditations.
  (4) The Harmony of the Rock.
  (5) Strom's Discussions of Poetics.
  (6) Chronicles of Arram.
  (7) Discourse on the Nature of Writing.

5 - If you search here, you may find and take 3 Sheets of Gold (which do not
  have any value).

6 - This entire garden is now overrun with green slime, which may do damage to
  your party if you step in it (1d4 damage to one character; it does not
  function like the tabletop version of green slime, thankfully).  You will
  automatically avoid the green slime after 8 encounters with it.  There is
  nothing useful here.

7 - If you search here, you will find a treasure worth 200 XP containing 3
  Potions of Extra Healing.

8 - This storeroom has 5 KOBOLD (#0) (Morale 10) who promptly surrender; if you
  accept their surrender, they will draw a map (Journal Entry 10).

9 - You encounter a MAD MAN (#25) here.  If you parley with him, his rantings
  turn out to have a bit of truth.  If you invite him to join, he will be
  reluctant but will join as an NPC (Morale 0); he will randomly cause trouble
  in New Phlan, however.

10 - If you search here, you will find a treasure worth 800 XP: a Manual of
  Bodily Health.  (This can be seriously abused to great profit; read the
  section on that if you are interested.)

SECTION 6.8 - Podal Plaza
-------------------------

     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15      ECL Script 18
   #############++###################++#############
 0 #        +  #E4#     #     #  #  #E4#     +     #  0  KEY:
   #     #######  #     #     #++#  #  #     #++####
 1 #     #     #  #     #     #  #  #  #     #     #  1  # wall
   ####++#     #  #     #++####  #++#  #++####     #     + Door/archway
 2 #     #     +  +     #                    +     #  2  X locked door
   #     #######  ####++#                    #######
 3 #     +                P  P  P  P  P  P      +  #  3  E Entrance/exit
   #######                       #++#           ####     P Plaza open area
 4 +E3        P  P  P  P  P  P  P#  # P  P       E1+  4    (random encounters)
   #######     #++#              #++#     #++#######
 5 #     # P  P#  # P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P#        #  5
   #     #     #++#        ####           #     ####
 6 #     + P  P  P  P  P  4+  # P  P  P  P+     #  #  6
   #     #                 #  #           #######  #
 7 #     # P  P  P  P  P  4#  # P  P  P  P      +  #  7
   #++####++#######        #++#     ####     #######
 8 #  #     #    2+    P  4#  # P  P#### P   + 1   #  8
   #++####  #     #        ####     ####     #     #
 9 #     #  #     # P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P#     #  9
   #     ####     #                          #######
10 #     #  #     # P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P   +  # 10
   ####++#  #######              ####           ####
11 +E3                 P  P  P  P#  + P  P  P    E1+ 11
   ####++####++#     ####++#     ####        #++####
12 #     #     #     #     #    P  P  P  P   #     # 12
   #############  ####     #++#        ####  #######
13 #     XE5      +  #     #  #        #  #  +     # 13
   #     #++#++#  #######++#  ####++#  #  #++#     #
14 #     #  #  #  +     +  #  #     #  +  #  #     # 14
   #     ####  #  #     #  #  #     #  #  #  #     #
15 #    3   XE5#E2#     #  +  #     #E2#  #  #     # 15
   #############++###################++#############
     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15

Podal Plaza is a hotbed of monstrous humanoid activity; you must pass through
it to reach Stojanow Gate and Valjevo Castle.

Preparation: If you have received the Phlan clerk's commission (#4) to
  investigate the auction here, you will be offered the option to "stride
  boldly forward", "disguise party as monsters", or "sneak, remaining unseen".
  Unless you relish multiple fights against huge numbers of monsters, don't
  stride boldly forward.  For avoiding random encounters it does not matter
  much which of the other two you choose, but disguising your party gives you
  better chances at avoiding detection in non-random encounters.

Random encounters: These are only checked for in open areas, marked P on the
  map.  Surprise never happens; you will always have the opportunity to parley.
  Monsters are chosen with the following algorithm.

  Base number of base monsters is calculated by:
    * dividing Party Strength by the indicated divisor (call the result X)
    * picking a random number between X and 2X, inclusive
    * if you are on mission, and you chose to "stride boldly forward" or lost
      stealth: multiply by 2
    * minimum of 2, maximum of 50
  Move is movement, for determining success of "F"lee; this is compared to the
    movement of your slowest party member.

              Base                Base Number    Base  Leaders (+10
    Chance  Number  Base Monster  For Leaders  Morale  Morale if present)  Move
    ------  ------  ------------  -----------  ------  ------------------  ----
    2 in 9  PS / 3  GOBLIN GUARD (#2)      40      30  5 GOBLIN LEADER (#3)   6
    2 in 9  PS / 3  GOBLIN GUARD (#2)      40      35  5 GOBLIN LEADER (#3)   6
    2 in 9  PS / 3  ORC (#4)               30      40  4 ORC LEADER (#5)      9
    1 in 9  PS / 3  ORC (#4)               30      45  4 ORC LEADER (#5)      9
    1 in 9  PS / 6  HOBGOBLIN (#6)         20      45  3 HOBGOBLIN LDR (#7)   9
    1 in 9  PS /12  OGRE (#8)             N/A      50  N/A                    9

  If you have received the Phlan clerk's commission to investigate the auction:
    There is a 3 in 26 chance the monsters are just gossiping; the gossip
    cycles through the following:
    1. "Do you think he'll really show up -- the Boss I mean?"
    2. "More ogres on the street, since the giants took over the castle."
    3. "He melted into a puddle of lard when he touched the thing!"
    4. "The Boss will be the guy bidding up the price."
    5. "The plaza's Bane temple is recruiting for Mace again.  Grishnak won't
       be happy."

    The chance of a confrontation is 4 in 26, or 9 in 26 in Search mode.
    * If you chose to "stride boldly forward", any attempt to "P"arley will
      result in combat.
    * If you are disguised, there is a (6 + 5 per human in party) in 101 chance
      that the monsters will demand, '"Who are you?"':
      * "H"aughty or "A"busive: if Party Strength is greater than or equal to
         1d51, you avoid combat.  Otherwise, the monsters attack.
      * "S"ly: if your spokesperson's Charisma reaction modifier is greater
        than or equal to 1d31, you avoid combat.  Otherwise, the monsters
        attack.
      * "N"ice or "M"eek: immediately start combat (you just gave away your
        heroic character!)
    * If you are sneaking, there is a 1 in 6 chance your party will get the
      same demand as above.

  If you have not, or if you have already completed that commission:
    The chance of a random encounter is 1 in 26, or 8 in 26 if you are in
    Search mode.  Parleying does not automatically result in combat; "A"busive
    is the most likely to avoid combat, and "H"aughty is the least, though with
    Charisma 17 or higher, any option will always work.

Fleeing: Your party is moved to one of: (4,0); (5,1); (6,2); (7,3); (9,4);
  (10,5); (11,6); (12,7).

Resting: You may safely rest in the hidden temple of Ilmater, or if you have
  cleared the block.  Otherwise, rest is interrupted quickly (99% chance every
  5 minutes if you are on the council mission; 16% chance every 10 minutes if
  not).

Clearing the block: You can clear the block once you have defeated 10 random
  encounters while not on mission.  This counter will always be reset to 0
  every time you re-enter if you do not finish the mission.  If that is not
  possible because you chose to "stride boldly forward" or lost stealth, you
  cannot ever clear the block.

Differences from the tabletop adventure: In "Podol" Plaza, disguising yourself
  is less reliable, though you can actually win the auction and claim the wand
  (though doing so costs more than its market value).

E1 - Exit to Kuto's Well.

E2 - Exit to Cadorna Textile House.

E3 - Exit to Wilderness (24,28).

E4 - Exit to Stojanow Gate.

E5 - Entrance to hidden temple of Ilmater.  The door is locked; bashing and
  picking the lock can work but not reliably; the Knock spell will always work.

1 - Temple of Bane (converted temple of Ilmater).  You meet an orc priest of
  Bane here.  "G"reet or "A"ttack will result in a fight with 1 ORC LEADER (#5)
  (Morale 90, Distance 1) unless you disguised the party as monsters.  If you
  did, you will be recruited for the larger temple of Bane across the river.
  Regardless of whether you say yes or no, you will be asked to return in two
  hours.  If you do return, you will be attacked by 8 ORC (#4), 3 OGRE (#8), 1
  ORC LEADER (#5) (Morale 50, Distance 1).

  At the end of either combat, you can pick up 6 Leather Holy Symbols (of Bane)
  which are of some use on the mission to clear the larger temple of Bane.

2 - The Pitt, a monster tavern.  This game predates Fallout 3 by more than
  twenty years, so you won't find the Lone Wanderer here.

  The first time you enter, you will accidentally bump into a buccaneer.  He
  gets angry and confronts the party.  You may:
  * "C"hallenge him and fight 1 4TH LVL FIGHTER (#41) (Morale undefined), one-
    on-one, without other repercussions; you even get to keep his Long Sword +1
    and Chain Mail +1.  The easy way to beat him is by casting Sleep, which
    works more often than not.
  * "A"ttack him outright, which results in a full combat with 1 4TH LVL
    FIGHTER (#41), 4 HOBGOBLIN (#6), 12 GOBLIN GUARD (#2), and 8 ORC (#4)
    (Morale 30, 234 XP).
  * "F"lee, which will work but causes the loss of any stealth in this visit.
  * "B"ribe him with 10% of your money and light items.

  Once the buccaneer encounter is resolved, you can hang out in the bar:
  * Mix with monsters: if you are not disguised, this causes the bar's
    patrons to attack, as above.  If you are disguised, you get insulted and
    can respond:
    * Joining in heavy drinking: same result as "Drink heavily" below.
    * Try to leave: causes the bar's patrons to attack, as above (including
      that buccaneer).
    * Attack or Insult back results in a tavern brawl where some monsters
      are your side; monsters are GOBLIN GUARD (#2), HOBGOBLIN (#6), and OGRE
      (#8) (Morale 50).
  * Drink heavily: the party wakes up drunk in the alley behind the bar with
    all its money and 50% of its light items missing, and causes the loss of
    any stealth in this visit.
  * Attack: results in the same combat as attacking the buccaneer (including
    the buccaneer).

  Any combat with all of the bar's patrons results in the bar's abandonment,
  unlike the taverns in New Phlan.  (Monsters evidently have the sense to avoid
  places where deadly tavern brawls have happened!)

3 - A priestess of Ilmater can heal you here; her services are the same as
  those in New Phlan, detailed in the Temple Spells section.

4 - If you have received the Phlan clerk's commission to investigate the
  auction here, and you neither chose to "stride boldly forward" nor lost
  stealth, entering one of these squares triggers the start of the auction of a
  wand or staff.  (If you chose to "stride boldly forward" or lost stealth
  before starting the auction, you cannot ever either complete the mission, or
  clear the block if you have not already done so.)

  If you chose to disguise the party as monsters, your chance of evading
  detection when checked is 5 in 6.  If you are sneaking, you are always
  detected when checked.  If you are detected, you are confronted by the most
  recent monster group you had met as if you were striding boldly forward.

  When the auction begins, you may:
  * Stand and listen: No risk; allows the auction to proceed.
  * Move in closer: You must roll to avoid detection, though if you succeed
    'You now see the wand isn't a major artifact, it's only a Wand of Fear!'
    If you do not get caught, the auction proceeds.
  * Listen to comments: No risk; you hear one of two rumors:
    * '"It's a Wand of Illumination.  Who cares, I see in the dark anyway!"'
    * '"It's a Staff of Command.  I could have my own army!"'
    and the auction proceeds.
  * Leave: You must roll to avoid detection, and you do not see the rest of the
    auction.

  If you allow the auction to proceed, the high bidder of 5000 gold is a
  magic-user named Garwin, accompanied by an ogre named Buldwar.  You may:
  * Make a bid: You do not actually need the 5000 gold for this.  You must roll
    to avoid detection.  If you succeed, Garwin casts a darkness spell upon the
    auction block.  You may then:
    * Follow the ogre: You seize and search Buldwar, but he doesn't have the
      wand.  You must then roll again to evade detection.
    * Move quietly away: You must roll to avoid detection, and you do not see
      the rest of the auction.
    * Look for the man in plain clothes: No risk; you will be unable to find
      Garwin, though.
  * Wait for winner: No risk.  Garwin wins the item and disappears.
  * Leave: You must roll to avoid detection, and you do not see the rest of the
    auction.

  You cannot win the auction yourself; the wand is not significant, anyway.
  (In the tabletop version, no one even knows its command word.)  Any result of
  the above (even if you don't see the end of the auction as requested by the
  council) will complete the mission.

SECTION 6.9 - Cadorna Textile House
-----------------------------------

     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15      ECL Script 2
   #############++###################++#############
 0 #  #     +  #E2#  +  ####  +  #   E2#     +     #  0  KEY:
   #  #######  #  #  #  ####  #  #  ####     #     #
 1 #  +  #     #  #  #        #  #  #        #     #  1  # wall
   ####++####++#  #++#######++#++#  #++#############     ~ illusionary wall
 2 #     +                                   ~     #  2  ' rubbled wall
   ####  #  ####++####  #######++#  '''''''  ####++#     + door/archway
 3 #  + 1#  # 2      #  #  +     #  '     '  +     #  3
   ####  #  ####     #  #  #  ####  '     '  #######     E Entrance/exit
 4 +E3   +  +  +     #  #  #  ####  '     '  '   E1+  4
   #######  ##########  ####++####  ''''++'  #######
 5 #     #                                   #     #  5
   #     #  #++''''  ####'''     ##########  #++## #
 6 #     #  #     '  +     '     #  +     #  #     #  6
   #++#++#  #     '  #######     ####     #  #     #
 7 #  #  +  #     '              #        #  +     #  7
   #############''##########     ####++####  #######
 8 #    2#5a+  #  #        #              '       2#  8
   #     #  #  #  #        #++#############++#######
 9 #     #  #  #  #    4   #  # 6      #  +     +  #  9
   #'''  ####++#  #++####++#  #######++#  #     ####
10 #  '  +  +    3           3      +  #  #     #  # 10
   #'''  #######              #######++#++#######  #
11 +E3   #     +      1a      #     +  #         E1+ 11
   ####  #  7  #     ####     #     #  #++##########
12 #  #  #     #     ####     #     #  #  '        # 12
   #  #  #++####     ####     #++#######  '        #
13 # 2+  #  #  +             3         +  '        # 13
   ####  #++#++#  #++####++#++#++##########''#     #
14 #     # 5b  #  #        #  #      10~11#  #     # 14
   #     #++####  #++#     #  #     ####  ####     #
15 #     # 8#     # 9+     #  #     #        #     # 15
   #################################################
     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15

Junior Councilman Porphyrys Cadorna is the last heir to the Cadorna family
fortune.  He hired an adventurer to search the old Cadorna Textile House, but
nothing has been heard from him.  He will hire your party to search for both
the adventurer and the Cadorna family treasure, and will pay for the return
of the treasure.

Random encounters: The chance of a random encounter is 1 in 31, or 1 in 6 if
  you are in Search mode.

  If you are in the south-central hobgoblin-patrolled portion of the map, and
  have not defeated the ogre leading the hobgoblins, you always encounter:
    8 HOBGOBLIN (#6) and 1 HOBGOBLIN LDR (#7) (Morale 60, Distance 2, 40 XP)
  which do not count towards the encounter limit, and do not stop until you
  have defeated the ogre leading the hobgoblins.

  Otherwise, there are 10 random encounters in the rest of the Cadorna Textile
  House, which do not scale to the party's strength.  To determine which one,
  roll 1d11 and add the number of random encounters already fought:
    1 to 4: 8 POISONOUS FROG (#38) (Morale 60, 52 XP)
    5 to 8: 3 LARGE SCORPION (#18) and 1 HUGE SCORPION (#39) (Morale 50,
      Distance 1, 64 XP)
    9 to 13: 5 GHOUL (#72) and 1 WIGHT (#20) (Morale 100, Distance 2, 180 XP)
    14 to 18: 10 SKELETON (#34), 8 ZOMBIE (#35), and 1 WIGHT (#20) (Morale 100,
      Distance 2, 200 XP)
    19 or more: 8 HOBGOBLIN (#6) and 1 HOBGOBLIN LDR (#7) (Morale 60, Distance
      2, 40 XP)
  None of these monsters can be bargained with or otherwise be avoided once
    encountered, and almost all combats feature either monsters that have
    deadly poison attacks, or undead that can drain levels.

Fleeing: Your party is moved to one of: (4,2); (11,2).

Resting: You may rest without being interrupted by monsters outside the
  hobgoblin-patrolled area if you have defeated all 10 random encounters; in
  the hobgoblin-patrolled area, you must defeat the ogre leading the hobgoblins
  to rest safely.  You may be disturbed by a random encounter otherwise.  Your
  rest may still be disturbed even if it is safe, but it is by nothing (this is
  a bug).

Clearing the block: The council considers the block cleared once you have both
  defeated all 10 non-hobgoblin random encounters, and defeated the ogre at
  location 10 who leads the hobgoblins.  For the block clearing to trigger,
  you must wander around and roll for another random combat; only then does
  the game script realize there are none left.  You won't see any direct sign
  of this.

Differences from the tabletop adventure: The tabletop version has a different
  layout, is inhabited entirely by gnolls, lacks Skullcrusher and the thieves'
  guild, and the family treasure is not sealed.

E1 - Exit to Mendor's Library.

E2 - Exit to Podal Plaza.

E3 - Exit to Wilderness (24,28).

1 - This well has a note saying "Thieves Only".  Any non-thief who attempts to
  climb down will fall, taking 15d6 damage; equipping a Ring of Feather Falling
  does not prevent damage, though it is supposed to.  (That's a fall of 150
  feet!)  A thief can successfully climb down if not wearing armor heavier than
  leather, making a standard Climb Walls roll to determine success.  If you
  reach the bottom alive, you greet the thief Restal:
  * If you are not a thief, or are not on Junior Councilman Cadorna's mission,
    he magically expels you from the well.
  * If you were not expelled, he offers to help you into the Cadorna Textile
    House.  If you accept, you are moved to location 1a (which circumvents the
    combat at location 3).
  * If you then bring back the unopened Cadorna family treasure, he offers to
    open the box and replace the seal so it appears unopened, for a cut of part
    of the treasure.  If you accept, you receive treasure worth 1200 XP
    containing: 2 jewelry, 4 gems, 200 platinum, four pieces of item jewelry,
    and Gauntlets of Ogre Power.

2 - You find a page from a diary (Journal Entry 11) in the first one of these
  locations you enter.

3 - If the thieves did not sneak you into the textile house, you are attacked
  by guards the first time you enter one of these locations: 12 HOBGOBLIN (#6)
  and 2 HOBGOBLIN LDR (#7) (Morale 60, 63 XP).

4 - Hobgoblin barracks.  Whatever you do, you are attacked by 14 HOBGOBLIN (#6)
  and 3 HOBGOBLIN LDR (#7) (Morale 60, 76 XP).

5 - Hobgoblin encounter.  Whatever you do, you are attacked at 5a by 10
  HOBGOBLIN (#6) and 2 HOBGOBLIN LDR (#7) (54 XP); at 5b by 12 HOBGOBLIN (#6)
  and 2 HOBGOBLIN LDR (#7) (Morale 60, 63 XP).

6 - A dead hobgoblin lies here, with "Skullcrusher was here" written with its
  blood nearby.  Nothing is on its body.

7 - This unholy temple is guarded by the hobgoblin priestess GRISHNAK (#28),
  12 HOBGOBLIN (#6) and 3 HOBGOBLIN LDR (#7) (Morale 100, 353 XP).  You will
  find among the hobgoblins' items: Cursed Necklace, Brass Key, Potion of
  Healing, Magic-User Scroll (Reduce, Detect Invisibility, Fireball), and
  Magic-User Scroll (Burning Hands, Mirror Image, Blink).  (The Stone Statuette
  is heavy and useless.)

  In other news, evidently the Boss offers sex-change operations to veterans of
  Sauron's armies.

8 - You find a muscular man locked up here, and some of his notes (Journal
  Entry 47).  The only way to free him is to use the Brass Key from the combat
  with Grishnak in location 7.  You can then ask SKULLCRUSHER (#28) (Morale
  100) to join your party.

9 - No, you can't kill the baby hobgoblins here.  (Some German bureaucrat is
  probably happy about this.)

10 - If Skullcrusher is in your party, he points out the secret door here.

11 - The ogre leader of the hobgoblins attacks here: 1 OGRE (#8), 18 HOBGOBLIN
  (#6) and 4 HOBGOBLIN LDR (#7) (Morale 100, Distance 1, 132 XP).  If you
  defeat them, you find the sealed Cadorna family treasure, which you may
  either "T"ake unopened, or "O"pen immediately for 1943 XP, 4 jewelry, 8 gems,
  400 platinum, 20 silver, 450 copper, four pieces of item jewelry, Gauntlets
  of Ogre Power, and the wrath of Junior Councilman Porphyrys Cadorna.

  You get a better total reward if you have the thieves at location 1 open the
  treasure and recreate the seal, then return it to Cadorna.

SECTION 6.10 - Kovel Mansion
----------------------------

     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15      ECL Script 14
   #############++###################++#############
 0 #            E2                   E2            #  0  KEY:
   #                                               #
 1 #                                               #  1  # wall
   #        ###################++#++#############  #     + door/archway
 2 #        #     #     #     #     +           #  #  2
   #        #     # BS  # BS  #     #     BS    #  #     E Entrance/exit
 3 #        #   T1+     +     +     #           #  #  3  BS Thief backstab
   #        #     ####++#######++#++####++#######  #     T Trap
 4 #        # 1   #        #     #     #        #E1+  4
   #        #######        #     #     #        #  #

 5 #        #    7#    2   +     #     +   2b   #  #  5
   #        #++################++#++#######++####  #
 6 #        #     +T2      #     #     #        #  #  6
   #  #######     #        #     #     #        #  #
 7 #  +     # BS  #    8   #     #     +   BS   #  #  7
   #  #     #     #############++#     #        #  #
 8 #  #     #     #     #      2a+     #        #  #  8
   #  #######++#++#     #        ################  #
 9 #  #     #  #   BS   +        #10      #     #  #  9
   #  #     #  #        ####++####        #++####  #
10 #  +     #  #        #        #   T1   #   11#  # 10
   #  #     #++##########        ####++####     #  #
11 #  #     #     #     +        +   BS   +T3   #E1+ 11
   #  ####### T1  #     ####++####++####  #     #  #
12 #  #     #     + BS  #   BS   # 9   #  #     #  # 12
   #  #     #++####     ####++####     #++#######  #
13 #  +     # 6   #     #    3   #     #T1      #  # 13
   #  #######     #++####        #     #        #  #
14 #        #     # 5   + 3  4   #     #      12#  # 14
   #        #####################################  #
15 #            E3                   E3            # 15
   #############++###################++#############
     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15

The main thieves' guild of Phlan now operates out of ancient Kovel Mansion.
The council wants you to clear them out; you may keep whatever treasure they
happen to have.

How to get here: Take the boat from the Phlan dock to the "B"ay, then enter the
  "N"orth side of the city.

Random encounters: None.

Resting: You may not safely rest if you have not yet cleared the block; three
  thieves will each launch a sling bullet at the party (3 THAC0 10 attacks on
  random characters, 1d4+1 damage per hit).

Clearing the block: To clear this block, you must kill at least 21 thieves in
  combats that count, which are the ambushes marked BS and the combats at
  locations 1, 2b, and 3.

Differences from the tabletop adventure: The layout is identical and the map
  plays much the same way (the tabletop version has a thief count of 18),
  although the Gold Box version has much less powerful spell scrolls.

E1 - Exit to Wilderness (26,27).

E2 - Exit to Wilderness (26,26).

E3 - Exit to Wealthy Area.

BS - If you have not cleared the block, when you enter this room a thief will
  sometimes ambush you here:
  * 30% chance if the count of thieves killed is less than 12, 35% chance
    otherwise: the thief will backstab one character.  This is a THAC0 -10
    attack that does 2d8 damage if the count of thieves killed is less than 12,
    or 3d8 otherwise.  You cannot retaliate or catch the thief in this case.
  * Otherwise: You catch the thief, and get the option to attack the thief or
    let him go.  If you attack the thief, you fight 1 1ST LVL THIEF (#45) if
    the count of thieves killed is less than 18, or 1 6TH LVL THIEF (#51)
    otherwise (Morale 30 for either).  Winning this combat increases the count
    of thieves killed by 1.

T - The first time you enter this room, you will encounter a trap.  A thief
  may roll to detect and disarm it before it hits you.  The traps do damage as
  follows:
  T1 - blade trap (THAC0 0 attack on a random character, 1d6 damage if it hits)
  T2 - bladed net trap (1d6 damage to random character, saving throw vs. spell
    negates)
  T3 - poison gas attack (1d3 damage to random character, saving throw vs.
    poison negates)

1 - There is a pile of weapons and armor here.  You can search them for traps,
  which is a standard thief Find/Remove traps roll, or is automatic with the
  Detect Traps spell.  Disarming the trap is also a standard thief Find/Remove
  traps roll.

  If you fail to disarm the trap, or simply tried to take the treasure, you set
  off an ambush trap that depends on the count of thieves killed:
  * 0 to 7: fight 5 6TH LVL THIEF (#51).
  * 8 to 12: fight (kills-7) 1ST LVL THIEF (#45) and (12-kills) 6TH LVL THIEF
      (#51).
  * 13 to 17: some very strange things happen that aren't well-defined.  In
      programming terms, with 13 to 15 kills an integer underflow occurs, and
      you may have to fight a large number of level 1 thieves.  With 16 or 17
      kills, the game dereferences a stale pointer when defining the number of
      level 1 thieves.
  * 18 or more: There aren't enough thieves left for an ambush; this acts as
      if you had disarmed the trap.
  The thieves surprise you (Morale undefined).  If you fought a combat with 0
  to 15 thief kills beforehand, this increases the count of thieves killed by
  5.

  However the ambush is resolved, the treasure is worth 600 XP and contains 2
  Daggers +1, Hammer +1, Morning Star +1, Scimitar +1, Short Sword +1, Shield
  +2, Chain Mail +1, and Broad Sword -2.

2 - Two thieves try to ambush you, fail, and flee.  If you try to give chase,
  they split up at location 2a:
  * If you follow the thief that headed "E"ast, you end up at location 2b,
    where you can fight a thief handled as if you had fought one at location
    BS.
  * Following the thief that headed "S"outh will lead you into the ambush at
    location 3.

3 - In the first of these locations you enter, you are surprised by 15 1ST LVL
  THIEF (#45) and 3 6TH LEVEL THIEF (#51) (Morale 60, 263 XP).  This combat
  counts as 15 kills towards clearing the block, not 18; it will also not
  disappear just because you have otherwise cleared the block.

4 - There are some files here (Journal Entry 38, Journal Entry 51).

5 - A slate has a map drawn upon it (Journal Entry 41).

6 - A wooden cabinet is here.  It is trapped; if your thief fails to deal with
  the trap, every party member must save vs. poison or take 2d6 damage.  You
  must then bypass its lock; when done, within is a treasure worth 666 XP:
    Magic-User Scroll (Fireball, Haste, Hold Person)
    Magic-User Scroll (Blink, Ray of Enfeeblement, Slow)
    Clerical Scroll (Hold Person, Cure Blindness, Bestow Curse)
    Clerical Scroll (Prayer, Remove Curse, Animate Dead)
    Magic-User Scroll (Reduce, Detect Invisibility, Fireball)
    Magic-User Scroll (Burning Hands, Mirror Image, Blink)

7 - A crude map is on the floor (Journal Entry 29).

8 - There are four caskets here; all of them are both trapped and locked.  They
  contain:
  A - 500 XP, 12 gems (trap: poison needle does 1d4 damage to one character,
        saving throw vs. poison negates)
  B - 366 XP, 1 jewelry (trap: poison dart does 1d3 damage to one character)
  C - 125 XP, 3 gems (trap: poison powder does 1d6 damage to every character,
        saving throw vs. poison negates)
  D - 833 XP, 20 gems (trap: volley of darts launched at party: 12 THAC0 10
        attacks on random characters, 1d4 damage per hit)

9 - 10 1ST LEVEL THIEF (#45) (Morale undefined, 23 XP) are beating up an older
  thief; they turn to attack you.  When you win, the old thief dies, but not
  before giving you some papers (Journal Entry 48).  This combat does not count
  towards clearing the block.

10 - This loot pile worth 400 XP includes a Short Sword +2 and Leather Armor
  +4 among the other nonmagical items.

11 - There are three cabinets here; all of them are locked, and cabinet C is
  also trapped.  They contain:
  A - some papers (Journal Entry 23, Journal Entry 14)
  B - 12 XP, 1500 silver
  C - 300 XP, 1800 gold (trap: needle trap, 1 THAC0 -20 attack on random
    character, 1d8 damage if it hits)

12 - There is a pile of 26 huge tapestries and 2 fine tapestries here (they are
  very heavy and not worth that much).

SECTION 6.11 - Wealthy Area
---------------------------

     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15      ECL Script 24
   #############++###################++#############
 0 #     #     #E2#     +     #     #E2#    #      #  0  KEY:
   #     #     #  #     #     #     #  #    #      #
 1 #     +     #  #     #     #     #  #    +      #  1  # wall
   #++####     #  #     #++####     #  #++##########     + door/archway
 2 #     #     #  #     +  +        #           #  #  2
   #  ##########  #######++####++####           #  #     E Entrance/exit
 3 #  +                                         +  #  3
   ####                                         ####
 4 +E3                                           E1+  4
   #######        ############################++####
 5 #     #        #     +        #        #    1   #  5
   #     #        #     #    5   #    4   #        #
 6 #     +        #  6  #        +    1   +    2   #  6
   #     #        #     #############++####        #
 7 #     #        #        #              #        #  7
   ##########     ####++####  #######     ####++####
 8 #        #     #    7   #  #     #     #    3   #  8
   #        #     #        #  #     #     #        #
 9 #        +     #        #  #  1  +     #        #  9
   #        #     #        #  #     #     #        #
10 #        #     #        #  #     #     #        # 10
   ##########     ##########  ####++#     ##########
11 +E3                                           E1+ 11
   #######++################++#######        #######
12 #  +        +  #     #    8   #  #        #     # 12
   #  #        #  #     ####++####  #######  #     #
13 #  #        #  #     +     +     ####  #  #     # 13
   #######++##########++#     ####++####  #++#++####
14 #     #     +  #     #     #     ####     #     # 14
   #     #     #  #     ####++# 10  ####     #     #
15 #     +     #  # 9   +     +     ####     +     # 15
   #################################################
     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15

This was once the home of old Phlan's wealthy, but it is now occupied by orcish
patrols from the adjacent Temple of Bane.

How to get here: Take the boat from the Phlan dock to the "B"ay, then enter the
  "S"outh side of the city.

Random encounters: The odds of a random encounter are 2 in 30 normally, or 5 in
  30 if you are in Search mode.

  The following monsters patrol this block; they continue to do so until both
  this block and the Temple of Bane have been cleared:
    40%: special patrol of 4 ORC (#4), carrying Bane's symbol of a black hand
      on a red field; they carry 6 Leather Holy Symbol (of Bane)
    20%: GOBLIN GUARD (#2) (Morale 50, Parley modifier +20)
    20%: ORC (#4), ORC LEADER (#5) (Morale 55, Parley modifier +10)
    10%: HOBGOBLIN (#6) (Morale 60, Parley modifier +10)
    10%: OGRE (#8) (Morale 80, Parley modifier +0)
  If you successfully "F"lee, you will not actually move.  The four-orc patrol
  will not fight unless forced to, and will have different things to say
  depending on attitude:
  * "H"aughty or "A"busive: 'In a deep threatening voice one of the orcs says
    "You moles better watch your step or you shall feel the wrath of Bane!"
    After saying this he spits and leaves.'
  * "N"ice or "M"eek: 'The orcs yell out, "We have orders to check out
    suspicious individuals, but youse guys look harmless enough."  After
    talking the four orcs wander away.'
  * "S"ly: 'One of the orcs says, "Oh, yeah youse them guys who know where de
    treasure is.  We not supposed to kill you yet."  The orcs then wander
    away.'

  For other encounters, "P"arley starts you with a score of 4 for "M"eek; 29
  for "H"aughty, "S"ly, or "N"ice; or 59 for "A"busive.  Then, add 1d31, your
  spokesperson's Charisma reaction modifier, and the parley modifier for the
  appropriate monsters:
  * Score is 74 or below: The monsters attack you immediately.
  * Score is 75 to 99: '"Get outa here before we make you leave", the monsters
    yell.  "And you wont come back if you know whats good fer ya."  The
    monsters then leave.'
  * Score is 100 to 139: '"We gotta keep all you nonbelievers outa here", the
    monsters say as they begin to leave.  "So hit the road ya bums."  The
    monsters turn and leave.'
  * Score is 140 or higher: 'You intimidate the monsters so much they run
    away!'

Resting: It is not safe to rest anywhere until you have cleared both this block
  and the Temple of Bane; it is then safe to rest anywhere.  If you are
  disturbed, it will always be an attack by 10 ORC (#4) (Morale undefined, 23
  XP).

Clearing the block: The council will consider this block cleared once you have
  fought the combat at location 1.

Differences from the tabletop adventure: In the tabletop version, this isn't
  connected to the Temple of Bane mission; the only real quests are to clear
  the block of monsters and recover family heirlooms from the mansions here.
  The map is similar but not identical.

All experience rewards listed are for a 7-person party (it is assumed you have
Dirten with you).

E1 - Exit to Wilderness (26,27).

E2 - Exit to Kovel Mansion.

E3 - Exit to Temple of Bane.

1 - The first time you enter any one of these mansions, you are confronted by
  up to 20 ORC (#4) (Morale 99, 46 XP for 20).  They attack immediately if you
  are not carrying a set of Leather Holy Symbols; otherwise they act surprised,
  but you will end up fighting them if you do anything other than run away.

2 - If you are in Search mode when you first enter this room, you find a
  treasure worth 942 XP, containing 3 jewelry.  You cannot find this treasure
  otherwise.

3 - There are some cowering goblin slaves in this room.  Killing them is
  automatic and doesn't result in combat or XP (you meanie); if you talk, one
  of them tells you that you need a holy symbol of Bane to enter the Temple of
  Bane.

4 - If you are in Search mode when you enter this room, you may find a trap
  door concealing a hidden treasure worth 285 XP: Clerical Scroll (Animate
  Dead, Cure Blindness), Potion of Extra Healing, and Ring of Feather Falling.

5 - If you are in search mode when you enter this room, you find a treasure
  worth 942 XP, containing 3 jewelry.

6 - If you are in search mode when you enter this room, you find a tapestry
  (which is heavy and not that valuable).

7 - You are attacked by 6 ORC (#4) led by 1 OGRE (#8) (Morale 80, 42 XP).  They
  are carrying a piece of paper (Journal Entry 53).

8 - The guards of this mansion attack immediately: 6 ORC (#4) and 2 ORC LEADER
  (#5) (Morale 80, 29 XP).

9 - The message here does not mean anything (the clue book specifically states
  it is false).

10 - This room has some crude beds; if you search you are attacked by 8 ORC
  (#4) (Morale 80, 18 XP).  There is nothing else here.

SECTION 6.12 - Temple of Bane
-----------------------------

     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15      ECL Script 24
   #################################################
 0 #     #     #     +     #  +     #     +        #  0  KEY:
   #     #     #######     #++#############        #
 1 #     +     #     #     #              #        #  1  # wall
   ##########++#     #++####              #++#######     + door/archway
 2 #     +                                   #     #  2
   ####++#           ################        #     #     E Entrance/exit
 3 #     #           #              #        +     #  3
   #######        ####     ####     ####     #######
 4 #  #           ####     ####        #         E1+  4
   #  #        #######     ####        #############
 5 #  +        ####1a                        #######  5
   ####     #######  ####  ####  ####  ####  #######
 6 #  +     #                                      #  6
   #  #     #        #  #  #  #  #  #  #        ####
 7 #  #     +        #  #  #  #  #  #  #        ####  7
   ####   E2#        #  #  #  #  #  #  #       2####
 8 #  #     +        #  #  #  #  #  #  #        ####  8
   #  #     #        #  #  #  #  #  #  #        ####
 9 #  +     #                           1c         #  9
   ####     #######  ####  ####  ####  ####  #######
10 #  +        ####                          ####### 10
   #  #        #######     ####        #############
11 #  #           ####     ####        #         E1+ 11
   #######        ####     ####     ####     #######
12 #     #           #         1b   #        +     # 12
   #     #           ################        #     #
13 #     +                                   #     # 13
   #     #        #++####     #++#           ####++#
14 #     #        #     #     #  #           #     # 14
   #######++####++#     #++####  #######++#######  #
15 #  +        #  #     #     #  +     #        #  # 15
   #################################################
     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15

The old Temple of Ilmater is now occupied by orcish forces who have rededicated
it to the evil god Bane.  The temple is currently led by the half-orc cleric
Mace.  The council of Phlan is interested in defeating Mace and reclaiming the
temple for the gods of good.

Random encounters: Encounters are identical to those in the Wealthy Area (q.v.)
  except that you will not be bothered in the central actual temple building if
  Mace is letting the party search for the treasures inside.

Resting: Same as for the Wealthy Area.

Clearing the block: The council will consider this block cleared once you have
  defeated Mace.  It does not matter whether or not you have Dirten present for
  this.

Differences from the tabletop adventure: The temple encounters work much the
  same way, but the magical treasure is far less valuable in the Gold Box
  version (mostly because most high-level spells aren't implemented here).

All experience rewards listed are for a 7-person party (it is assumed you have
Dirten with you).

E1 - Exit to Wealthy Area.

E2 - Entrance to the Temple of Bane proper.  An old blind orc stands guard here
  with eight orc guards.
  * If you have parleyed with at least one of the special four-orc patrols:
    You will automatically be admitted entry.  This is intended to be a trap;
    Mace wants the party to search the temple for hidden treasure, then attack
    the party himself to claim the treasures.
  * Otherwise:
    The orcs do not know about your party, so you are not automatically allowed
    entry.  The blind orc will check for the presence of at least one Leather
    Holy Symbol (of Bane).  If you have one, he will let you in if you permit
    him to search your party.  Otherwise, you will have to attack the temple
    guards of 8 ORC (#4) (Morale 99, 18 XP) to gain entry to the temple.

  If you have entered the temple and attempt to leave, that will trigger the
  combat with Mace and his followers described below if it has not already
  happened.

1 - These three locations have treasures beneath hidden trap doors, which you
  can find by searching.  Mace wants you to find these for them, then ambush
  you to get the treasures himself.  The treasures are as follows:
    1a - 342 XP; Clerical Scroll (Animate Dead, Cause Disease, Prayer),
      Clerical Scroll (Snake Charm, Silence 15' Radius, Bless), Magic-User
      Scroll (Fireball, Ray of Enfeeblement, Stinking Cloud).
    1b - 800 XP; Potion of Giant Strength, Potion of Healing, Potion of Speed,
      Wand of Magic Missiles (20 charges), Dust of Disappearance, plus some
      nonmagical items.  (The Dust of Disappearance is an extremely powerful
      consumable item -- don't waste it!)
    1c - 457 XP; Hand Axe +1, Dagger +1, Hammer +1, Mace +1, Morning Star +1,
      Scimitar +1, Spear +1, Short Sword +1.
  After you find the third of these treasures, you will be immediately attacked
  by MACE (#33) leading 30 ORC (#4), 20 ORC (#44), and 5 ORC LEADER (#5)
  (Morale 99, 256 XP), unless Mace has already been defeated.  (Note that some
  of these orcs are "elite" orcs armed with short bows.)  Mace is carrying a
  Mace +1 and a notice recorded as Journal Entry 25.  If Dirten is with the
  party, he will leave your party after this battle.

2 - These two squares have a crude altar to Bane.  If you defile it, and you
  have not already defeated Mace, he attacks immediately.  (There is no Morale
  bonus as the clue book suggests.)

SECTION 6.13 - Wilderness
-------------------------

             1111111111222222222233333333334444  KEY:
   01234567890123456789012345678901234567890123
 0                                               . plains
 1                                               " swamp
 2   ...&&&^^&&&&&&&&&&&&&&..&&&&&&&&&&&&&&&&    + forest
 3   &&&^^^^^^^&&^^^^&^^&&&&..&&&&&&&&&&&&&&&    & hills
 4   &^^^^^^^^^&&^^^^^^^^&&&&..&&&&&&&&&&&&&&    ^ mountains
 5   ^^^^^^^^^&&&^^^^^^^^^&&&.&&&&&&&&&&&&&&&    ~ river (the Stojanow is not
 6   ^^^^^^^^&&&^^^^^^^^^^&&&..&&&&&&&&+&+&&&        passable below Lake Kuto
 7   ^^^^^^^^&^^^^^^^^^^^&&&&.&&&&&&&&+++++&&        until you defeat Yarash)
 8   ^^^^^^^^&&^^^^^^^^^&&&....&&&&&&+++m++&&    = impassably large body of
 9   ^^^^^^^^k&^^^^^^^^&&&&....&&&&&&+++++&&&        water (Lake Kuto or the
10   ^^^^^^^^&&^^&&&&&&.&&......&&&&&&+++&&&&        Moonsea)
11   ^^^^^^^^&~&&&&&&++.....h....&&&&&&&&&&&&
12   ^^^^^^^^&&~~~~+++++....++......&&&&&&&&&    (NB: terrain that is not
13   &&^^^^^&&&&&&&~+++++..++++.....&&&&&&&&&    water has no effect other than
14   &&&^^^&&&&&..++~+f+++.+++++...&&&&&&&&&&    appearance)
15   .&&&&&.&&&..+++====++++++++..&l&&&&&&&&&
16   ..........+++++==g=.+++++++++.&~&&&&&&&&
17   .........+++++++===..+++++++++.~~&&&&&&&
18   .........+++++++.~~...++++++++..~~&&&&&&
19   ....""...++++++..~~...++++++++..&~&&&&&&
20   ....""....+++++..~....+++++++++.&~~&&&&&
21   ...."".....++++..~~...+++++++++.&~&&&&&&
22   ....""".....+++.++~~...+++++++&&&~&&&&&&
23   ....."".....++.+++.~...+++++++&&&~&..&&&
24   ....."j"......+++++~~...++++++&~~~&...&&
25   ....."""......+++++.~~~.+++++++~&...+++&
26   ....."".......++++++..~cc++++++~.++++++=
27   .....""........+++++++.ab.++.++~+++++===
28   .....""........+++++++d==.....+~~~~=====
29   ....."".........++e++++=========~e======
30   ....."".....==.=====+===================
31   ..........n=============================
32   .i........==============================
33   =.=====.================================
34   ========================================
35   ========================================
   01234567891111111111222222222233333333334444
             0123456789012345678901234567890123

The wilderness near Phlan is not extensive enough that it has any other
significant town or city, but it does have a variety of places you can
adventure in, plus the inevitable random encounters.

Random encounters: There are three different sets of random encounters and
  lairs; which set depends on your current X coordinate.  (The terrain makes
  no difference.)  You can often avoid combat in random encounters with
  intelligent monsters by parleying; the effect of attitude varies by monster
  set.

  The chance of a random encounter is 5%.  A random encounter is with monsters
  20 in 21 times, and is a lair entrance 1 in 21 times.  Lairs cannot be auto-
  mapped but are small, and any can reoccur any number of times.

  "W"ait will always avoid combat if your party is not surprised and the
  monsters are.  It otherwise always results in combat.

  "F"lee can only work if neither side is surprised ('You spot a group of
  <monsters>.')

  To find the effect of a "P"arley, if the monster has a parley receptiveness
  other than 0 (always hostile) or 50 (always friendly), add together the
  following (surprise does not matter):
    * Parley receptiveness
    * Parley attitude modifier for that monster set
    * Your spokesperson's Charisma reaction modifier
    * 1d31
  If the result is:
    * 99 or less: The monsters are insulted and attack.
    * 100 to 139: 'You convince the <monsters> that combat is not necessary and
      you go on your way.'
    * 140 or more: 'The <monsters> fall for your sparkling personality and
      wander away without a fight.'

  Monster tables explanation:
    Fr Frequency (chance out of 19 for Western; 18 for Central; 20 for Eastern)
    Di Divisor: the base number of monsters is equal to Party Strength divided
       by this.  This is subject to a random additional division:
       * 1 in 6 chance: no extra divisor
       * 3 in 6 chance: divided by 2
       * 2 in 6 chance: divided by 3
       The mininum number of monsters is 1.
    Mo Morale
    Pa Parley receptiveness; 0 is always hostile, 50 is always friendly,
       intermediate values work as above.
    Mv Movement; if "F"leeing is possible, the chance of that succeeding is
       this compared to the movement of your slowest party member.  (It isn't
       necessarily its actual combat movement.)
    Re Size reduction: if the base monster group is at least as large as this,
       this will be subtracted until it is smaller than this number; one
       additional "extra monster" will be added for each subtraction.

  Western Wilderness (X=2 to X=15, ECL Script 25):
    Fr  Base Monster           Di  Mo  Pa  Mv  Re  Extra Monster
    --  ---------------------  --  --  --  --  --  ---------------------
     2  QUICKLINGS (#10)        4  60  10  96
     3  WILD BOAR (#120)        4  60   0  15
     1  GIANT MANTIS (#74)     10  60   0  12
     3  TIGER (#119)            6  60   0  12
     2  THRI-KREEN (#118)      10  60  30  18
     1  AHNKHEG [sic] (#65)     8  60   0  12
     2  CENTAUR (#67)           4  60  50  18
     2  CORPORAL (#54)          2  80  10   6  10  CORPORAL (#54)
     1  1ST LVL THIEF (#45)     2  40  10  12  40  6TH LVL THIEF (#51)
     2  GIANT SNAKE (#60)       8  60   0  15

    Quicklings cannot be surprised.
    The party is surprised by giant mantises on a roll of 1 to 5.
    Tigers and corporals are only surprised on a roll of 1.

    "P"arley modifiers:  Haughty     Sly    Nice    Meek Abusive
                         ---------------------------------------
                              19       9      49      -1      29

    You can also occasionally randomly find the following small maps:
      Small dark cave: 2x combat against 1 GIANT SNAKE (#60)
      Small dark cave: combat against 1 AHNKHEG [sic] (#65); anhkheg's victims'
        treasure worth 104 XP containing 1 gem, 500 electrum, 2000 silver, 5000
        copper
      Small dark cave: confrontation with 2 THRI-KREEN (#118) which allows
        you to "L"eave; combat against 3 THRI-KREEN; combat against 4
        THRI-KREEN (1951-2084 XP) with treasure of 1 jewelry, 15 gems, 1000
        gold, 2000 silver, and 1 random magic item
      Small dark cave: combat against 2 WILD BOAR (#120); mother WILD BOAR that
        will only attack if you "A"pproach her; combat against 3 WILD BOAR

  Central Wilderness (X=16 to X=28, ECL Script 26):
    Fr  Base Monster           Di  Mo  Pa  Mv  Re  Extra Monster
    --  ---------------------  --  --  --  --  --  ---------------------
     4  KOBOLD (#123)           1  40  30   6  40  KOBOLD LEADER (#1)
     2  DISPLACER BEAST (#68)   6  60   0  15
     1  DRIDER (#69)            7  60   1  12
     3  STIRGE (#61)            2  60   0  18
     3  LIZARDMAN (#57)         3  50  20   6
     1  BANDIT (#97)            2  60  20   9  20  AIDES (#53)
     2  NOMAD (#40)             1  60  50   9  30  AIDES (#53)
     2  MERCHANT (#98)          1   0  50   9  30  AIDES (#53)

    Driders are dangerous spellcasters who know Fireball.

    "P"arley modifiers:  Haughty     Sly    Nice    Meek Abusive
                         ---------------------------------------
                              29      29      29       4      59

    You can also occasionally randomly find the following small maps:
      Ruined huts: imprisoned kobolds; combat against 2 MUTANT LIZ-MAN (#58);
        combat against 4 LIZARDMAN (#57)
      Small wooded grove: pool, "A"pproach for combat against 6 LIZARDMAN
       (#57); combat against 2 DISPLACER BEAST (#68)
      Small wooded grove: combat against 6 STIRGE (#61)

   Eastern Wilderness (X=29 to X=41, ECL Script 27):
     Fr  Base Monster           Di  Mo  Pa  Mv  Re  Extra Monster
     --  ---------------------  --  --  --  --  --  ---------------------
      4  KOBOLD (#0)             1  40  30   6  40  KOBOLD (#0)
      3  GNOLL (#73)             2  50  20   9
      3  LIZARDMAN (#57)         3  60  20   6
      2  GIANT LIZARD (#59)      4  50   0  15
      2  HIPPOGRIFF (#113)       4  70   0  18
      1  WYVERN (#121)           8  70   0  24
      2  TROLL (#31)             7  60  10  12
      1  PHASE SPIDER (#116)     6  70   0  31
      2  MINOTAUR (#62)          7  70  10  12

     Phase spiders and wyverns both have deadly poison attacks.

     "P"arley modifiers:  Haughty     Sly    Nice    Meek Abusive
                          ---------------------------------------
                               19      19       4       4      29

     You can also occasionally randomly find the following small maps:
       Small dark cave: random encounters with KOBOLD (#0) (Morale 50)
       Small dark cave: combat with 2 GIANT LIZARD (#59) (Morale 100); combat
         with 4 GIANT LIZARD (Morale 60); combat with 2 MINOTAUR (#62) and 4
         GIANT LIZARD (Morale 70); treasure worth 355-488 XP containing 3000
         electrum, 4000 silver, 6000 copper, and 1 random magic item
       Small dark cave: random encounters with GNOLL (#73) (Morale 60); combat
         with 4 TROLL (#31) and 12 GNOLL (Morale 75)
       Small dark cave: 2x combat with 1 WYVERN (#121) (Morale 100); wyverns'
         treasure worth 1679-1745 XP containing 3 jewelry, 3 gems, 1000 gold,
         2000 electrum, 6000 silver, 5000 copper, and 1 random magic item

Resting: Every 8 hours, rest outdoors has a 10% chance of being disturbed by a
  random encounter appropriate for where you are.  In a lair, rest is never
  disturbed.

a (25,27) - Phlan.  You can step freely on this square as if nothing were here.

b (26,27) - East of Phlan.  You can choose to enter Phlan to:
  * the "N"orth, to Kovel Mansion (15,4)
  * the "S"outh, to Wealthy Area (15,4)
  * to the Civilized Area (15,1) by "B"oat

c (25,26) and (26,26) - North of Phlan.  You can choose to enter Phlan via:
  * the northern "C"ity gates of Phlan, to Kovel Mansion (4,0)
  * the "G"raveyard, to Valhingen Graveyard (0,4)

d (24,28) - West of Phlan.  You can choose to enter Phlan to:
  * the "N"orth, to Podal Plaza (0,4)
  * the "S"outh, to Cadorna Textile House (0,4)

e (20,29) and (35,29) - A boat here can take you back to the Civilized Area
  (15,1) of New Phlan.

f (19,14) - A rowboat is hidden here next to the lake; you can take it to
  Sorcerer's Island (19,16).

g (19,16) - Yarash's Pyramid stands before you on Sorcerer's Island.  You may:
  * "E"nter, to Yarash's Pyramid Level 1 (15,0)
  * "G"o back to (19,14)

h (25,11) - Entrance to Nomad Camp (1,14).

i (3,32) - Entrance to Zhentil Keep Outpost (7,0).  You may only enter if you
  have received the diplomatic mission here.  Otherwise, you are challenged by
  guards who demand that you leave; failure to do so results in combat with 12
  CORPORAL (#54) (Morale undefined), and nothing further happens.

j (8,24) - The first time you enter this square you are attacked by 2 AHNKHEG
  [sic] (#65) (Morale 90, Distance 1, 143 XP).

k (10,9; ECL Script 19) - As you first approach this square, you see a dragon
  flying into a lair. If you "E"nter the cave, the silver dragon Diogenes asks
  you to "S"tate name and intent or leave.  If you do the former, you will be
  asked for your reason for being here:
  * Ask dragon for advice, Pledge party to dragon's service or Offer gift:
    Diogenes appears, greets you, and asks that you retrieve a silver bottle
    from the kobold complex far to the east, then return for another quest.
  * Challenge evil leader of old Phlan: Diogenes appears, upset that you
    misidentified him.  If you "A"pologize, you get the same result as asking
    for advice.  If you "S"lay the dragon, he leaves in disgust; if you then
    "F"ollow" him then "A"ttack, every party member must save vs. breath weapon
    or take 11d6 damage.  (This might be the only place in the game where you
    take cold damage, except the game engine doesn't support typed damage
    outside of combat.)
  (Incidentally, the real historical Diogenes was a hilarious character.)

l (32,15) - Kobold Caves.  Every time you approach the caves without them being
  cleared, you are attacked by 25 KOBOLD (#0) and 5 KOBOLD LEADER (#1) (Morale
  50).  There are two entrances, a "L"arge entrance to Kobold Caves (10,0) and
  a "S"mall entrance to Kobold Caves (6,0).

m (37,8) - Entrance to Lizardman Keep (8,14).

n (12,31) - Entrance to Buccaneer Base (0,8).  This does not show up on the map
  at all until you get the mission to rescue the heir to Bivant, and you may
  not re-enter the base once that mission has been resolved one way or the
  other.

SECTION 6.14 - Nomad Camp
-------------------------

     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15      ECL Script 17
                                       ~~~~~~~~~~~~~
 0                                     ~~~~~~~~~~~~~  0  KEY:
            @           @        @  @  ~~~~~~~~~~~~~
 1                          ///////////~~~~~~~~~~~~~  1  # wall
                     @     @//      ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~     + door/archway
 2                    ////////      ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~  2  ~ water
         @            //            ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~     @ tree
 3                    //               ~~~~~~~~~~~~~  3  / tripwire
            @  @     @//   #++#        ~~~~~~~~~~~~~
 4           ///////////   #  #              ~~~~~~~  4  E party enters here
      @      //            ####              ~~~~~~~     H party's hut
 5           //                              ~~~~~~~  5
            @//   ####        ####  ####     ~~~~~~~
 6           //   +  #        #  #  #  +        ~~~~  6
      @      //   ####        #++#  ####        ~~~~
 7           //                                 ~~~~  7
            @//         #######        ####     ~~~~
 8           //         #     #        #  +     ~~~~  8
             //         #     #        ####     ~~~~
 9           //         #     #                 ~~~~  9
            @//   ####  ####++#              ~~~~~~~
10           //   +  #                       ~~~~~~~ 10
             //   ####  ####        #++#  ~~~~~~~~~~
11           //         +  #        #  #  ~~~~~~~~~~ 11
      @     @//         ####  #++#  ####~~~~~~~~~~~~
12           /////            # H#     ~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 12
               @//            ####  ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
13              ///////////         ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 13
         @        @     @//         ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
14   E                   //////////////~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 14
            @              @  @     @  ~~~~~~~~~~~~~
15                                     ~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 15
                                       ~~~~~~~~~~~~~
     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15

The nomads may possibly join with the Boss.  The council commissions you to
prevent that.  As it happens, the nomads are inclined to be friendly, and
respond well to heroic gestures.

When you first cross the tripwire perimeter, the nomads will approach you
cautiously.

If you choose to attack them outright:
  * Fight 14 NOMAD (#40) (Morale 100).
  * You will soon have two more such encounters; trying to parley at this point
    will no longer work.
  * The fourth encounter is with the nomads' leaders: HASSAD (#42), 1 SHAMAN
    (#43), 5 4TH LVL FIGHTER (#41), 49 NOMAD (#40) (Morale 100, 2817 XP).  The
    nomads receive a special penalty of -2 to-hit, and carry 5000 gold.  They
    additionally carry:
    * Hassad: Long Sword +2, Shield +1, Scale Mail +2
    * shaman: Dagger +2, Bracers AC 2, Wand of Magic Missiles (50 charges)
    * fighters (each): Long Sword +1, Chain Mail +1

If you parley, the nomads' chief greets you and invites you to a feast in your
honor.  If you refuse, the nomads are insulted and ask you to leave; failing to
do so results in the same combats as above.  Up to this point, you may choose
to leave and restart the map as if nothing had happened.

If you accept the invitation, the feast proceeds without incident, and the
leader Hassad tells you of dangers all around the wilderness (Journal Entry
55).  He tells you his concern about an incoming attack of kobolds, and begs
you to consider staying to defend the nomads.  You are led to a hut to rest
and consider.  If you choose not to help and actually leave, the kobolds will
kill all the nomads; this will complete the mission, but you will not receive
much reward for this method.

If you stay around the camp, there will eventually be a kobold attack:
  * If you are within the tripwire perimeter, and you have never attacked the
    nomads, 2d7 NOMAD (#40) fight on your side.
  * You fight [(56 - # of nomads) divided by 2, rounded down] each of KOBOLD
    (#0) and KOBOLD (#123) (Morale 80).  Attempting to flee will only delay the
    inevitable fight.

The second wave attacks a few minutes later; this is the same as the first
wave, except that if you attacked the nomads during the first fight, the
kobolds and nomads ally against you.

The third and final wave attacks a few minutes later:
  * If you backstabbed the nomads, you fight 49 KOBOLD (#123) allied with
    HASSAD (#42), 1 SHAMAN (#43), and 5 4TH LVL FIGHTER (#41) (Morale 100).
    The kobolds and nomads receive a special penalty of -1 to-hit, and carry
    8000 gold and the same magical items as above.  This fight cannot be
    avoided.
  * If you heroically did not backstab them, the nomads encourage you to help
    out finish off the invaders:
    * If you agree, with the help of HASSAD (#42) and 2 4TH LVL FIGHTER (#41)
      you fight 27 KOBOLD (#0) and 26 KOBOLD (#123) (Morale 50, Distance 2).
      The kobolds' treasure includes 3000 gold; the nomads further reward you
      with 1633 XP, 5000 gold, a Two-Handed Sword +2, and a Wand of Magic
      Missiles (35 charges).
    * If you do not, the nomads succeed on their own, and give you a reward
      "equal to your honor" of 83 XP and 500 gold.
    In either case, the nomads will agree not to join with the Boss.

The council considers the mission satisfied if either Hassad is killed, or you
are rewarded by him for defeating the kobolds.  (Note that his Shaman carries
the only guaranteed Bracers AC 2 in the game; that is an excellent magical item
so the reward for being a villain is actually greater here!)

Differences from the tabletop adventure: The map is different, but the
  structure is otherwise similar.

SECTION 6.15 - Kobold Caves
---------------------------

     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15      ECL Script 13
   #################################################
 0 #12#############     +        #     +17   #######  0  KEY:
   #++#############~~####        #     ####  #######
 1 #     #     ####  ####  15    +16   ####18#######  1  # wall
   #     #     ####  ####  #######     ####  #######     ~ illusionary wall
 2 #     # 13  #        +  #           +     #  ####  2  + door/archway
   ####++#     #        ######################  ####
 3 ####11+     +14 14 14#  #  #  #  #     +     # 6#  3  E Entrance/exit
   ####  #######        #~~#~~#~~#  #     ####  #  #
 4 ####  ####  ~                 #  +     ####  #  #  4
   ####++#######                 #++##########++#  #
 5 #     ####  ~         8a      #     +        #  #  5
   #  #############++####++#######     #     ####  #
 6 #  #######           #  #     +     #     # 5   #  6
   #++#######           #  #######++#######++#     #
 7 #        +           #        +     +     #     #  7
   ####++####++####++##########++####++#++####     #
 8 ####  ####  #     +     ####  #     +     #  4  #  8
   ####  ####  #######     ####++#############     #
 9 #     +     +     #     +      10+ 9  8+ 7      #  9
   #     #######++#######++################        #
10 #     ####     #######  ################        # 10
   #  #######     #######++###################     #
11 #  #######     #### 2#        +     #######     # 11
   #  #######++#######  #######++#     #######     #
12 #  #     +     +          3   #     #######     # 12
   ####     ##########  ######################     #
13 ####     ########## 1######################     # 13
   ####     ##########  ######################     #
14 ####              #  ##########                 # 14
   ####     ####  ####++##########  ####           #
15 ####     ####  ####E1##########E1####           # 15
   ###################++##########++################
     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15

The kobolds are also considering an alliance with the Boss.  The council
commissions you to prevent that from happening.

Special penalties: Many of the rooms and corridors are kobold-sized.  If you
  are in combat against nothing other than kobolds and kobold leaders, then
  you receive the following penalties: THAC0 is penalized by 2; all damage
  rolls get 2 subtracted; humans, half-elves, and elves have movement reduced
  by 4 (minimum 1).  The kobolds also receive a +2 bonus to-hit.

Traps: The traps here may automatically be bypassed if you are being escorted
  by a kobold.  You can also automatically find them with the Detect Traps
  spell active, or if you are in Search mode and a thief passes a Find/Remove
  Traps roll; you may then have a thief try to bypass the trap with a Find/
  Remove Traps roll.

Random encounters: The chance of a random encounter is 1 in X.  X is normally
  21; add 40 to X if you are not in Search mode; add 100 to X if you have
  fought the combat at location 14.  The random encounter is with 15 KOBOLD
  (#0) and 3 KOBOLD LEADER (#1) (Morale 30).

Fleeing: Your party is moved to one of: (0,12); (6,12); (1,14); (9,11); (7,10);
  (6,11).

Resting: If you entered through the large cavern, you can safely rest there if
  you have not fought the wyvern.  Otherwise, you must defeat the three waves
  of attacks in the throne room at location 14 to rest; even then, every 8
  hours rest has a 5% chance of being disturbed.

  If you get disturbed, it is by seven skulking kobolds who each launch rocks
  at the party (7 THAC0 10 attacks on random characters, 1d4+1 damage per hit)
  and retreat into the shadows, without you being able to retaliate.

Clearing the area: For this area to count as cleared, you must visit location
  16, which confirms the death of the kobold king.

Differences from the tabletop adventure: The tabletop version has a different
  map with more treasure and only kobolds as enemies.

E1 - Exit to Wilderness (32,15).

1 - There is pit trap here.  If you do not bypass it, a party member falls in
  a pool of water, losing 20% of his or her money and light items.

2 - If you search the mine tailings here, you will find a kobold's crude
  drawing (Journal Entry 42).

3 - A kobold approaches and offers a truce.  If you agree, you are led to
  location 8.  If you do not, it triggers the trap here.

  If the kobold triggers the trap, or you come back later and you fail to
  bypass it, a deadfall trap does 2d6 damage to all characters who fail a
  saving throw vs. petrification/polymorph; you are then surprised by 20
  KOBOLD (#0) (Morale 25).

4 - In one of these locations you may be attacked by the 1 WYVERN (#121)
  (Morale 100) that lives in the large cavern, if you haven't yet defeated it.

5 - The wyvern's treasure is here: 1166-1233 XP, 2 jewelry, 2 gems, 1000 gold,
  500 electrum, 1000 silver, 2 random magic items.

6 - If you search here, you find a narrow crevice with a crippled kobold
  within.  If you give it water, it is grateful and tells you its story
  (Journal Entry 20).

7 - There is a steep climb on loose rocks from the large open cavern to the
  narrower ones where the kobolds live.  If you climb here, and you have not
  yet fought the wyvern at location 4, the noise you make draws its attention,
  and it surprises and attacks you here.

8 - If you originally entered this map through the "L"arge cave entrance, you
  encounter a drunken passed-out kobold.  If you awaken it, it believes you are
  guests of the king, and asks if you want to be led to him; if you accept, you
  are led to location 8a.

  If you were led here by the kobold from location 3, you get the option to
  follow it through the door to the east.

9 - There is a spike trap here.  If you do not bypass it, the spikes do 2d4
  damage to one character (save vs. death to avoid, no save for a thief failing
  a disarm roll).

10 - There is a net trap here.  If you do not bypass it, you are attacked by 20
  KOBOLD (#0) (Morale 50) who surprise the party after the trap entangles you.

11 - You greet a barbarian princess in the process of strangling a kobold.  She
  greets you (Journal Entry 16), and offers to join your party; you may accept
  or attack her, PRINCESS FATIMA (#104) (Morale 100).  She will leave the party
  as soon as you leave the map.

12 - This is the prison cell that Princess Fatima just broke out of.

13 - This barracks has a crude map on the wall (Journal Entry 28).

14 - Kobold king's throne room.  The first time you enter one of these
  locations, you start three combats with no breaks for the party.  The kobolds
  launch ballista attacks between waves (7 THAC0 3 attacks on random
  characters, 2d6 damage per hit).
  * Wave 1: 4 TROLL (#31), 35 KOBOLD (#0), 11 KOBOLD LEADER (#1) (Morale 70,
    618 XP).
  * Wave 2: 5 WILD BOAR (#120), 45 KOBOLD (#0), 8 KOBOLD LEADER (#1) (Morale
    60, 212 XP).
  * Wave 3: 2 ENVOY (#87), 2 TROLL (#31), 2 WILD BOAR (#120), 8 KOBOLD (#0)
    (Morale 100, 767 XP); the Envoys each carry a Two-Handed Sword +2.
  The king flees after the battle.

  Have as many Fireball spells prepared as you can before coming in.  Two is
  enough to win; you can use them in the first two rounds, and rely on Stinking
  Cloud to defeat wave 3.  After wave 2, you should spend as much time as
  needed casting Cure Light Wounds to heal your characters and then cast buffs
  for wave 3.  You can also do this after wave 1, but you should stand on the
  trolls' bodies to stop them from reviving.

15 - The first time you enter this room, you are attacked by the kobold king's
  remaining guards: 3 TROLL (#1), 3 WILD BOAR (#120), 20 KOBOLD (#0), 4 KOBOLD
  LEADER (#1) (Morale 100, 522 XP).

16 - You find that the kobold king has been killed by one of his own traps
  here.  Discovering this will flag this area as cleared.

17 - If you search here, you find a brass bottle.  If you "P"ull it out, the
  stopper comes loose and an efreeti emerges and confronts you.  It asks you
  if you are vampires; if you say "Y"es that is the same as attacking it, which
  results in a battle with 1 EFREETI (#124) (Morale 100, 454 XP).  If you say
  "N"o, he asks you to only open the bottle with a vampire around; you receive
  666 XP and can pick up the Efreeti Bottle thereafter.

18 - The main kobold treasure hoard is here; worth 1158 XP, it contains 2
  jewelry, 6 gems, 50000 copper, 1 Silver Mirror, 1 Silver Brooch, Magic-User
  Scroll (Charm Person, Protection from Evil, Strength), Magic-User Scroll
  (Friends, Invisibility, Protection from Normal Missiles), and a large number
  of worthless items.

SECTION 6.16 - Yarash's Pyramid
-------------------------------

     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15      ECL Script 22
   ##############################################~~#
 0 #3a   #        #           #  +  #     #     #E1#  0  LEVEL 1
   #     ####  #++##########  #  #  #++#  #++#  #  #     KEY:
 1 #        +  #     # 4   +  +  #  +  #  +  #  #  #  1
   ####  ####  #  #######  #  ####  #  ####  ####  #     # wall
 2 #  +  #     +        #  #        #        #  #  #  2  ~ illusionary wall
   #  ####++## #######++#  #  ####++#  #++####  #  #     + door/archway
 3 #  #        #           #  +  +     #        #  #  3
   #  #  #++#  #  #######++####  ##########++####  #     E Entrance/exit
 4 #  #  #  #  #  +                 #      11   #  #  4
   #  #  ####  #  #  #++#######     #++##########  #
 5 #  #  #     +  #  #  #  +  +     #           #  #  5
   #  #  ##########  #  ####  #  #++#######++####  #
 6 #  #  ##########  #        #  #        #     #  #  6
   #  #++##########  ##########  #######  #  ####  #
 7 #     ##########              #     +  +  # 1+5b#  7
   ##############################################  #
 8 #           #  #     #        #     #  ~  # 2+9a#  8
   #  #++#######++#  ####  #++#  #++#  #  #######  #
 9 #  #                    #  #  #  #  ~  +  # 3#  #  9
   #  ##########++##########  #  #++#++####  #  #  #
10 #  +  #        ~           #  +     #     #  #  # 10
   ####  #  #++####++#######  #  #######  ####  #  #
11 #     #  #      2a      #  #     #  #  +  #  #  # 11
   #  ####  #  #######++#  #  ####  #  ####  #  #  #
12 #        #        #  #  #     +  #        #  #  # 12
   ####~~####  #++####  #  #++####  #++#######  #  #
13 #           #        +           +        #  #  # 13
   #  ##########  ####  ##########++#######  #  #  #
14 #  #  +  +  #  ####     #           #  +  ~  #  # 14
   #  #  #  #  #  ####++#++#++#######++#++#######  #
15 #  +  #  #  #        #                  10   #E1# 15
   ##############################################~~#

     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15

     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15      ECL Script 23
   #################################################
 0 #8b####     #   17  9#9c      #######           #  0  LEVELS 2 AND 3
   #  ####     #        #        #######  #######  #     KEY:
 1 #   14+15   +16    18#  19b   ####     #  +  #  #  1
   #######     #++#     #        ####  ####  #  #  #     # wall
 2 # 8   #     #  #     #        #     ####  #  #  #  2  ~ illusionary wall
   #++#  #     ###################  #######  #  #  #     + door/archway
 3 #  #  #              #######     #5a# 6 8a#  #  #  3
   #  #  #     ####++##########  ####  #######  #  #
 4 #6b#  #     #   20   ####     ####  #        #  #  4
   ####  #     #        ####  #######  #  #######  #
 5 #     #     #        ####  #######  #  #######  #  5
   #######     #        ####  #######  #  #######  #
 6 #           #        ####  #        #        #  #  6
   #########################  #  #############  #  #
 7 #######                    #  #############  #  #  7
   #######  ###################  #############  #  #
 8 ####     #           #######  #######        # 7#  8
   ####  ####  #######  #######  #######  ##########
 9 #     ####  #9b   #  #######           #        #  9
   #  #######  #     #  ###################        #
10 #  ~     #  # 19a #                    #   12   # 10
   #  #     #  #     ###################  #        #
11 #  #     ~  #     ###################  ~        # 11
   #  #     #  #####################################
12 #4a#     #                                 6a  5# 12
   ##########~~#  #############~~###################
13 ####      7a#  ##########        ##########9d   # 13
   ####        #  ##########        ##########     #
14 ####   13   #  ##########        #######  19c   # 14
   ####        #  ##########        #######        #
15 ####        #1a##########        #######        # 15
   #################################################
     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15

The mad wizard Yarash seeks to engineer a race of empowered freshwater sahuagin
to conquer the Moonsea region.  He is using lizardmen to experiment on, and his
experiments are also massively polluting the Stojanow River.

Random encounters: There are random encounters only on level 1, and not in the
  long corridor you start in.  The chance of a random encounter is 1 in 21, or
  1 in 3 if you are in Search mode.

  Random encounters are always hostile, and always Morale 100.  These creatures
  have been lost in the maze long enough to be starving, and seek to kill and
  eat anything they find.  The specific monsters you meet depend on which half
  of the level you are on; each of these 12 encounters can only occur once
  each:

  Northern half (some sources refer to this as the western half):
    (1) 20 STIRGE (#61) (153 XP), movement 18
    (2) 3 DRIDER (#69) (974 XP), movement 12
    (3) 3 MINOTAUR (#62) (332 XP), movement 12
    (4) 3 DIANE (#79) (95 XP), movement 12
    (5) 3 KOBOLD (#123) (4 XP), movement 9
    (6) 3 7TH LVL FIGHTER (#80) (314 XP), movement 9

  Southern half (some sources refer to this as the eastern half):
    (1) 3 6TH LVL FIGHTER (#75) (410 XP), movement 6
    (2) 3 DISPLACER BEAST (#68) (357 XP), movement 15
    (3) 3 7TH LVL DW FIGH (#76) (514 XP), movement 6
    (4) 3 LIZARDMAN (#57) (49 XP), movement 6
    (5) 3 7TH LVL THIEF (#77) (2227 XP), movement 12
    (6) 3 DRIDER (#69) (974 XP), movement 12

  If you try to "F"lee, success is determined based on the movement of your
  slowest party member compared to the movement above (which isn't necessarily
  the monster's actual combat movement).  You get a +3 bonus to movement for
  this purpose if you surprise the monsters, and a -3 penalty if the monsters
  surprise you.

Fleeing: On Level 1, your party is moved to one of:
  * If you are in the northern half: (0,0); (1,3); (8,6); (11,1).
  * If you are in the southern half: (5,11); (1,10); (8,14); (9,8).

  On Level 2, your party always flees to Level 2 (3,8).
  On Level 3, your party always flees to Level 3 (0,0).

Resting: Resting is always safe on levels 2 and 3.  On level 1, it is safe in
  the long corridor where you start, or on a half of the level where you have
  cleared all six of the random encounters.  Otherwise, every 10 minutes there
  is a 33% chance rest is disturbed by one of the unfought random encounters.

Clearing the area: The pyramid is considered cleared if you defeat Yarash at
  location 16.

Differences from the tabletop adventure: The overall theme is much the same,
  though the maps of level 1 and 2 are completely different, and the combats
  in the level 1 mazes are harder in the Gold Box version.  Yarash is lower
  level in the Gold Box version because the game engine doesn't support spells
  higher than 3rd level.

E1 - Exit to Wilderness (19,16).

1 - Teleport to 1a (Level 2 4,15); if you throw a rock through the portal, you
  can toggle the destination to and from 2a (Level 1 5,11).

2 - Teleport to 2a (Level 1 5,11).

3 - Teleport to 3a (Level 1 0,0).

4 - Teleport to 4a (Level 2 0,12).

5 - Teleport to 5a (Level 2 11,3); if you throw a rock through the portal,
  you can toggle the destination to and from 5b (Level 1 15,7).

6 - Teleport to 6a (Level 2 14,12); if you throw a rock through the portal, you
  can toggle the destination to and from 6b (Level 3 0,4).

7 - Teleport to 7a (Level 2 3,13).

8 - Teleport to 8a (Level 2 13,3); if you throw a rock through the portal, you
  can toggle the destination to and from 8b (Level 3 0,0).

9 - This teleporter's destination varies depending on how you set the dial at
  location 17:
    * Blue: teleport to 9a (Level 1 15,8)
    * Copper: teleport to 9b (Level 3 4,9), which has a teleporter back here
    * Silver: teleport to 9c (Level 3 7,0), which has a teleporter back here
    * Gold: teleport to 9d (Level 3 14,13), which has a teleporter back here

10 - A human priest greets you here.  You can attack him and fight 1 2ND LVL
  CLERIC (#78), but if you parley with a "N"ice or "M"eek attitude repeatedly,
  he will eventually tell you that he has nearly chiseled through the wall, and
  asks for help breaking through.  If you respond "Y"es, this creates a
  permanent exit to the Wilderness in the southern wall.

11 - The corpse of a man lies here.  Though stripped bare of gear, if you
  search it you will find a journal (Journal Entry 26).

12 - Room with lots of alchemical equipment and vats.  If you search the room,
  3 MUTANT LIZ-MAN (#58) (Morale undefined, 66 XP) emerge from the vats and
  attack the party.  The party is surprised on a roll of up to 4, whereas the
  monsters are only surprised on a roll of 1.

13 - 5 LIZARDMAN (#57) (Morale 60, 81 XP) approach you suspiciously, as they
  suspect you are servants of Yarash.  If you "P"arley with them, you can
  convince them not to attack.  Add your spokesperson's Charisma modifier to 0
  for "A"busive; 15 for "H"aughty or "S"ly; 30 for "N"ice; 50 for "M"eek.  The
  lizardmen will be peaceful if this is at least 75, and attack you immediately
  otherwise.

14 - You see a sign saying "Don't forget the password", with Dethek runes
  reading NOKNOK.  You will then be immediately asked for a password; if you
  say anything other than NOKNOK, all characters attacked by a super-strong
  mutant lizardman for 201 damage each.  (I suppose righteous fury against
  software pirates is what gives the lizardman that extra strength.)

15 - Here you find a series of pipes and fountains that Yarash is using for his
  experiments, and that is also polluting the Stojanow River.  You can destroy
  the equipment; if you fail to destroy it the first time, it is best to get
  away from it as it will then explode on its own.  The explosion does 3d10
  damage to every party member.

  Destroying the machinery marks the area as cleared, but this doesn't actually
  matter as you cannot leave Level 3 without defeating Yarash.

16 - You confront Yarash here; all options lead to combat, against 1 YARASH
  (#81) and 6 MUTANT LIZ-MAN (#58) (Morale 100, 959 XP).  Yarash carries
  Bracers AC 4, a Wand of Paralyzation (23 charges), 2 Potions of Healing, and
  1 Potion of Speed.

  Yarash is fond of using the Wand of Paralyzation; you should disable or kill
  him as soon as possible.

17 - A dial here controls the destination of the adjacent teleporter (location
  9); you may set this to blue, copper, silver, or gold.

18 - Yarash's desk is covered with papers.  Searching yields the following:
  * a letter from the Boss demanding that Yarash join him (Journal Entry 33);
  * Yarash's unsent reply (Journal Entry 49);
  * a message to the buccaneers offering a bounty for a real sahuagin (Journal
    Entry 27);
  * a warning about dangers in the mountains to the northwest (Journal Entry
    56);
  * a note to a trapper about kobolds and hobgoblins (Journal Entry 40).

19 - This storeroom has a lot of magical junk.  Searching yields treasure worth
  276-876 XP containing 400 gold, 1200 silver, and 3 random magical items,
  which you can find once in each of the three different storerooms.

20 - Three lizardman slaves work pumps.  If you attack them, they attack you
  with the barrels of mutagens they are holding (2 random characters take 201
  damage each); you then fight 3 LIZARDMAN (#57) (Morale 100, 49 XP); parleying
  with a "H"aughty, "S"ly, or "A"busive attitude has the same effect.  If you
  parley with a "N"ice or "M"eek attitude, they allow you to free them.  They
  then describe what Yarash is doing and how you can get help from their tribe
  (Journal Entry 35).

SECTION 6.17 - Lizardman Keep
-----------------------------

     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15      ECL Script 16
                  #~~~~~~~~#  #~~#  #~~#  ####
 0                #  '  '  #  #  #  #  #  #  #        0  GROUND LEVEL
      #############''''''''####''####''####''####        KEY:
 1    #                                         #     1
   ####     ##########                 ####     #        ~ moat (impassable)
 2 ~  '     #  '  '  #                    #     #     2  # wall
   ####     #''''''''#                    #     #        ' rubbled wall
 3    #     #  ' 3'  #            Eg      #     #     3  + door/archway
      #     ####++####                 ####     ####     \ stairs down
 4    #                                         '  ~  4
      #                                         ####     E Entrance/exit
 5    #                                         #     5
   ####  ##########  ####'''''''''              #
 6 ~  #  #     ' 2'  #Ec' 1' 1'Ed'              #     6
   ~''#  #     '''#  #''''''''####              ####
 7 ~  '  #   Ef' 2#  #  '  '  ####              '  #  7
   ####  #     #++#  #''''''''#\\#              '''#
 8    #  #    5#     ' 1'  '  'Ee'              '  #  8
      #  #'''  #     ''''  '''''''              ####
 9    #  ' 2'  #     ' 1'Eb' 1' 1'              #     9
      #  #'''  #     '''''''''''''              #
10    #  # 2'  #                                #    10
   ####  #''####                    ''''''####  #
11 #  '                             '     '  #  #    11
   ####                             '     #  #  #
12    #            Ea               '   4 +  #  #    12
      #                             '     #  #  #
13    #                             '     #  #  #    13
   ####                             ''''''####''#
14 ~  '                                      '  #    14
   ~'''''###################++#######''####''####
15 ~  '  '  #              #E1#     #  #  #  #       15
   ~~~~~~####              #++#     #~~#  #~~#
     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15

     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15      ECL Script 16
   #################################################
 0 ###############################~~################  0  CATACOMBS
   ###############################~~################     KEY:
 1 #######P1~~~###################~~~  ####Eg#######  1
   #######~~~~~###################~~~  ####  #######     # wall
 2 #######     #############           #     #######  2  ~ pool
   #######  ################  ####~~~~~#  ##########     \ stairs up
 3 #######  #############     ####P7~~~#  ##########  3
   #######  #############  #############  ##########     E Entrance/exit
 4 #######              #  #      Ed####  ##########  4  P Pool
   ###################  #  #  ##########  ##########
 5 #############Ec####  #  #  ~P6####     ##########  5
   #############  ####  #  ####~~####  #############
 6 #############  ####        #        #############  6
   #############  ####     ####  ####  #############
 7 ####Ef####              ####  ####     ##########  7
   ####  ####  ####  ~~~~  ####  #\\####  ##########
 8 ####  ####  ####  ~P8~        #Ee####  ##########  8
   ####  ####~~####  ~~~~  ####  #  ####  ##########
 9 ####  ~~~~P2#           ####  #        ##########  9
   ####  ####~~#  ####  #######  #  ################
10 ####  ####  #  ####  #Eb      #  ################ 10
   ####  ####  #  ####  ####  #  #  ################
11 ####        #     #  ####  #  #        ########## 11
   ##########  ####  #  ####  #  #  ####  ##########
12 ##########  ####  #        #  #  ####           # 12
   ##########  ####  #############  #######  ~~~~  #
13 ##########     #        ####     #  ~~~#  ~P5~  # 13
   #############  #  ~~~~  ####  ####  ~~~#  ~~~~  #
14 #############  #  ~P3~        ####  ~~~#        # 14
   #############  #  ~~~~  ####  ####  ~~~##########
15 #############Ea#        ####        ~P4########## 15
   #################################################
     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15

This ruined keep was once defended by a powerful wizard, who placed an anti-
magic shell around the entire area to protect against magical attacks.  That
did not stop the conventional assault that caused the keep to fall.  Now, the
ruins are occupied by lizardmen, who have been disrupting trade to the east of
Phlan.  The Boss has been courting them, but the lizardmen as yet have not
taken sides.  The council tasks you with preventing the lizardmen from joining
the Boss.

Special penalties: There is an anti-magic zone in this entire area; it is not
  possible to cast spells here, even from magic items.  Also, in either swampy
  areas or the restricted tunnels of the catacombs, you may receive
  additional penalties in combat.

Random encounters: None.

Fleeing: If you are on the surface, you move to (8,12).  If you are in the
  catacombs, you are moved to a pool-specific location near the pool you were
  at.

Resting: It is safe to rest anywhere.

Clearing the area: The area is considered cleared if you either defeat Drythh
  in a duel, or if you kill most of the lizardmen in the area.  In order to do
  the latter, you must defeat at least 40 lizardmen (there are a total of 50),
  though only battles in the catacombs and the main attack by 20 lizardmen at
  location 1 actually count.

Differences from the tabletop adventure: Both maps have the same outline,
  though the anti-magic aura only exists in the Gold Box version; the duel with
  Drythh also only exists in the Gold Box version.  The lizardmen in the
  tabletop version may present you with medallions that mark the bearers as a
  friend of all lizardmen.

E1 - Exit to Wilderness (37,8).

Ea/Eb/Ec/Ed/Ee/Ef/Eg - There are passages here that lead to the other layer;
  on the surface you may need to search for them.  The passages lead to the
  corresponding location on the other map.

  The first time you enter the catacombs, you are attacked by 10 GIANT LIZARD
  (#59) (Morale 100, 206 XP).  You receive penalties of -4 to hit and damage;
  humans, half-elves, and elves also receive -2 to movement.  (The number that
  attack is supposed to decrease if you kill some on the surface, but this
  doesn't actually happen.)

  Entering the catacombs also marks locations 1, 2, and 3 as visited; don't go
  underground until you have visited those areas.

P - If you approach this pool while some of the 50 lizardmen in this area are
  still alive, 5 LIZARDMAN (#57) (Morale 100, 81 XP) will emerge from the pool
  and each throw a javelin at random party members (each attack is THAC0 16 and
  does 1d6 damage).

  The first time you approach a pool, the lizardmen automatically surprise you;
  it is thereafter rolled for.  If you are surprised and they are not, they
  re-enter the pool before you can react.  Otherwise, you will have the chance
  to attack them; such combats inflicts penalties of -4 to hit and damage, and
  humans, half-elves, and elves receive a penalty of -2 to movement.

  You will then have the chance to enter the pool.  If you enter:
  * If you just encountered lizardmen here, and you did not defeat them, they
    will attack you without you being able to retaliate (5 THAC0 12 attacks on
    random characters, 2d2 damage per hit; then 5 THAC0 12 attacks on random
    characters, 1d8 damage per hit).
  * Otherwise, you find treasure if you have not yet searched this pool:
    P1, P2, P3, P7, P8: 216 XP, 1 gem, 1000 gold, 1000 silver
    P4, P5, P6        : 350 XP, 1 gem, 1000 gold, 1000 silver, Shield +2

1 - Former central keep.  The first time you enter this 4x4 area:
  * If you did not rescue the three lizardmen at Yarash's Pyramid location 20,
    and have not yet entered the catacombs: Lizardmen jump out of ambush and
    throw javelins at the party; each attack is THAC0 18 and does 1d6 damage.
    You are then immediately attacked by 20 LIZARDMAN (#57) and 4 GIANT LIZARD
    (#59) (Morale 60, 409 XP).  Your party receives penalties of -3 to hit and
    damage; humans, half-elves, and elves also get -2 to movement.
  * If you did rescue the three lizardmen, and this is the first time you have
    entered any of locations 1, 2, or 3: An old lizardman approaches you with a
    hand raised in gesture of peace.  "C"ombat results in the automatic death
    of the old lizardman; the lizardmen subsequently behave as if you had never
    saved their brethren (which results in the attack for this location).

    If you "P"arley, he asks you for the word that had been asked for in
    Journal Entry 35.  If you do not give the correct response of SAVIOR, you
    are attacked as if you were in location 3.  (You are supposed to get the
    monsters as if you hadn't rescued the lizardmen.)

    If you properly answer SAVIOR, the old lizardman relaxes and tells you his
    story (Journal Entry 31), concerning his rival Drythh who wants to join the
    Boss.  Drythh then immediately shows up and challenges the old lizardman;
    the old lizardman asks one of you to champion him:
    * If you say "Y"es, your chosen champion fights DRYTHH (#95) (Morale 100)
      one-on-one.  If you lose, the result is the same as if you had said "N"o.
      If you win, Drythh's followers withdraw, and the old lizardman assures
      the party that they will not join Tyranthraxus.  He then tells you that
      many lizardmen are still hostile to the party, and that it is best to
      leave.  (What this actually means in practice: You completed the quest,
      but if you feel like it, you can loot the catacombs, fighting battles
      there as if you hadn't.)
    * If you say "N"o, then the old lizardman fights Drythh himself, loses, and
      your party is attacked by 1 DRYTHH (#95) and 12 LIZARDMAN (#57) (Morale
      100, 218 XP).
  * If you did not rescue the three lizardmen and you have already entered the
    catacombs, or if you have already dueled Drythh, then nothing happens.

2 - Former servants' quarters.  The first time you enter this L-shaped
  building:
  * If you did not rescue the three lizardmen at Yarash's Pyramid location 20,
    and have not yet entered the catacombs: You are attacked by 3 GIANT LIZARD
    (#59) (Morale 100, 62 XP).
  * If you did rescue the three lizardmen, and have not yet had the encounter
    with the old lizardman, it happens as described in location 1.
  * If you did not rescue the three lizardmen and you have already entered the
    catacombs, or if you have already dueled Drythh, then nothing happens.

3 - Former storeroom.  The first time you enter this building:
  * If you did not rescue the three lizardmen at Yarash's Pyramid location 20,
    and have not yet entered the catacombs: You are attacked by 2 LIZARDMAN
    (#57) and 1 GIANT LIZARD (#59) (Morale 100, 53 XP).
  * If you did rescue the three lizardmen, and have not yet had the encounter
    with the old lizardman, it happens as described in location 1.
  * If you did not rescue the three lizardmen and you have already entered the
    catacombs, or if you have already dueled Drythh, then nothing happens.

4 - Former stables.  Nothing happens here.

5 - If you have not yet defeated Drythh in a duel, and you search this square,
  you will find a treasure worth 575 XP containing 1 jewelry, 1 gem, and 1000
  gold.

SECTION 6.18 - Buccaneer Base
-----------------------------

     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15      ECL Script 1
   ######################+++++######################
 0 ################  #10+ E1  +10#  ################  0  KEY:
   ################  ####     ####  ################
 1 #############                       #############  1  # wall
   #############  #######     #######  #############     + door/archway
 2 #######10#     #     #     #     #     #10#######  2
   #######++#     #     #     #     #     #++#######     E Entrance/exit
 3 #######        +  9  +     +  9  +        #######  3
   #######        #     #     #     #        #######
 4 ####           #     #     #     #           ####  4
   ####           #######     #######           ####
 5 #                                               #  5
   #  #############           #######  ##########  #
 6 #  #     #     #    3  4   #     # 6+        #  #  6
   #  #     #     #  ####++#  #     #  #        #  #
 7 #  +     #     + 3#    5# 3+  9  +  #        #  #  7
   #  #     #     #  #     #  #     #  #        #  #
 8 #  #     #     # 3#     # 3#     #  #        #  #  8
   #  #############  #######  #######  ##########  #
 9 #                   3  3                        #  9
   ####     ####++####           ####++####     ####
10 #10+     #        # 1  1  1  1#        #     +10# 10
   ####     #    9   #           #    9   #     ####
11 ####    2#        # 1  7  1  1#        #     #### 11
   #######  ####++####  #++####  ####++####  #######
12 #######              # 8   #              ####### 12
   ##########           #++####           ##########
13 ##########           #     #           ########## 13
   #############++#     #     #     #++#############
14 #############10#     #     #     #10############# 14
   ################     #######     ################
15 ################                 ################ 15
   #################################################
     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15

This area is not findable until you are tasked by the council to rescue the
heir to Bivant.  The council refuses to pay the ransom for the kidnapped child.
To succeed, you must rescue the child in any way possible.  Once you either
complete or fail the mission, you may not re-enter the base.

Random encounters: None, if you have either captured the base, or not rescued
  the boy by subterfuge or force.  Otherwise, you may face guards on alert,
  probability (random combats fought + 1) in 12; in 13 if the animals are
  currently free:
  * Wave 1: 20 BUCCANEER (#99) (Morale undefined, 46 XP)
  * Wave 2: 4 3RD LVL FIGHTER (#100) and 30 BUCCANEER (#99) (Morale undefined,
    84 XP)
  * Wave 3: 4 3RD LVL FIGHTER (#100) and 40 BUCCANEER (#99) (Morale undefined,
    108 XP)
  * Wave 4: same as location 7 wave 5.

Resting: You may rest anywhere safely if you have captured the base.  If you
  have not, but have rescued the boy by subterfuge or force, the boy is noticed
  and your rest is immediately disturbed by a group of BUCCANEER (#99).  If you
  have done neither, you may rest at will in the merchants' camp, but will be
  rousted out anywhere else.

Clearing the area: You may complete the mission via any of:
  (1) simply buy the heir to Bivant, which does not actually require any money
  (2) use violence to free the heir and all the other slaves.  This is easier
      if you distract the buccaneers by freeing the animals first.
  (3) use extra violence to capture the base outright.

  You may also fail the mission by:
  (1) surrendering to the buccaneers
  (2) rescuing and then subsequently abandoning the boy (by running from
      combat; you may get a warning about this first).

  The captain carries good equipment, so it pays to use extra violence.

Differences from the tabletop adventure: Both this area and the quest to rescue
  the heir to Bivant do not exist at all in the tabletop version.

E1 - Exit to Wilderness (12,31).  As you enter, you are led to the merchants'
  camp.

  If the guards are on alert, and the animals are not currently free, you fight
  8 BUCCANEER (#99) (Morale 100, 18 XP) as you approach the gate.

1 - Merchants' camp.

2 - A seedy merchant will sell a pass to see the buccaneer captain.  The pass
  (which is an inventory item) costs 25% of the active character's money.

3 - If you haven't already rescued the heir or stirred up the base, the first
  time you attempt to enter the slave pen from one of these locations you are
  given a description of the slaves, and the party identifies the heir to
  Bivant via his distinctive birthmark.  A merchant remarks that he can get a
  good price for him.  You may:
  * Punch merchant: His guard of 6 BUCCANEER (#99) (Morale 60, 14 XP) attacks.
    This does not result in any further trouble, and the merchant leaves.
  * Agree or Say nothing: Nothing happens.
  * Rescue boy: You have three options:
    * Sneak into pen: You move to location 4.
    * Attack guards: You fight the guards from location 4.
    * Do not rescue boy now: Nothing happens.

4 - Entrance to the slave pen.  If the animals from the animal pen are running
  around, any guards will be distracted and not present.  Attempting to sneak
  by the guards will never work.  Attacking the guards results in a fight with
  4 BUCCANEER (#99) (Morale 65, 9 XP).

5 - Slave pen.  If you have not captured the base, the heir to Bivant is here;
  you may Get him (even if you already have him), freeing the other slaves in
  the process.  Once you have the heir, fleeing from combat runs the risk of
  leaving the heir behind.

6 - Gate to animal pen.  You may choose to release the animals penned here.
  This will distract the guards for the next 60 minutes, but doesn't otherwise
  provoke them.

7 - If you have not captured the base, two large guards are standing here:
  You may pass them in peace if you "S"how pass.  "B"ribing them will not work.
  "A"ttacking them results in a fight with 2 4TH LVL FIGHTER (#41) (Morale
  100, 327 XP).  This will draw the attention of the buccaneers, and result in
  further waves of attacks:
  * Wave 2: 1 3RD LVL FIGHTER (#100) and 20 BUCCANEER (Morale 80, 61 XP)
  * Wave 3: 1 5TH LVL FIGHTER (#101), 1 3RD LVL FIGHTER, and 50 BUCCANEER
    (Morale undefined, 179 XP)
  * Wave 4: 1 5TH LVL FIGHTER, 2 3RD LVL FIGHTER, and 53 BUCCANEER (Morale 100,
    201 XP).  (53 is, in what may or may not be sheer coincidence, the size of
    a standard NFL roster.  Additional trivia: AD&D's birthplace is in hardcore
    Packer fan country; the Packers and Buccaneers were divisional rivals at
    the time.)
  If he is still alive, the buccaneer captain then approaches you, and gives
  you a chance to surrender.  If you do, you lose 75% of your money and 50% of
  your light items, and are forced to leave the base and fail the mission;
  otherwise you continue to fight:
  * Wave 5: 1 CAPTAIN (#102) (if still alive), 15 4TH LVL FIGHTER (#41), and
    40 BUCCANEER (Morale 100) (3561 XP if captain is still alive)
  Defeating this last wave causes all remaining buccaneers to surrender; you
  capture the base, and free all the slaves including the heir to Bivant, and
  if you killed the captain here you also may claim the captain's magical gear:
  Long Sword +4, Shield +2, Plate Mail +3.

  This series of combats is actually very easy, despite its scale.

8 - If you enter this room by using a pass, the buccaneer captain comes out to
  greet you.

  * If you "M"ention the young boy, you have the option to "B"uy the boy for
    75% of the party's money and 10% of the party's light items.
  * If you "A"ttack the captain, fight 1 CAPTAIN (#102) and 4 4TH LVL FIGHTER
    (#41) (Morale 100, 1669 XP).  You may then claim the captain's magical gear
    as above, though this does not capture the base, nor does it alert the
    other buccaneers.  If you run away, this does alert the other buccaneers.

9 - Buccaneer barracks.  This is empty if you have captured the base.  If not,
  and the animals are running rampant, the guards normally quartered here are
  busy capturing the animals.

  You are otherwise confronted by the buccaneers: if you captured the boy by
  subterfuge or force, you are attacked immediately.  Otherwise, you are asked
  to leave.  If you stay, you fight 5 waves of battles that start with 20
  BUCCANEER (#99) (Morale 70, 46 XP); waves 2-5 are the same as in location 7.

10 - If you have not captured the base, this guard tower is garrisoned by 4
  BUCCANEER (#99) (Morale 60, 9 XP).  If you captured the boy by subterfuge or
  force, they attack; otherwise you are asked to leave and may choose whether
  to attack or leave.  More guards appear if you defeat them and come back.

SECTION 6.19 - Zhentil Keep Outpost
-----------------------------------

     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15      ECL Script 28
   ######################+++++######################
 0 #     #        + 1   # E1  #     +        +     #  0  KEY:
   #     #VV####++#     #     #     #++####++#     #
 1 #     #       3#     #     #     #        #     #  1  # wall
   #++####        #######     #######        ####++#     V or > illusionary
 2 #  #                                         #  #  2         one-way wall
   #  #        ####++####     ####++####        #  #     + door/archway
 3 #  #        #    5   #     #    5   #      E2#  #  3
   #  #     #######++####     ####++#######     #  #     E Entrance/exit
 4 #  #     #  #           4           # 5+     #  #  4
   #  #     #  #  #######+++++#######  #  #     #  #
 5 #  +     + 5+  #                 #  #  #     +  #  5
   #  #     #  #  #  ####     ####  #  ####     #  #
 6 #  #     #  #  #  #  +     +  #  #           #  #  6
   #  #     ####  #  ####     ####  ####        #  #
 7 #  #E2         #                 #  #        #  #  7
   #  #           #  #++#######++#  #  #        #  #
 8 #  #E2         #  # 2   #     #  #  +        #  #  8
   #  #           #  #     #     #  #  #        #  #
 9 #  #           #  #     #     #  #  #        #  #  9
   #  #     ####  #  #     #     #  ####        #  #
10 #  +     #  #  #  #     #     #  #           +  # 10
   #  #     #  #  #  #############  #  ####     #  #
11 #  #     + 5+  #                 #  > 5>     #  # 11
   #  #     #  #  ###################  #  #     #  #
12 #  #     #  #                       #  #     #  # 12
   #  #     #######++####     ####++#######     #  #
13 #  #        #    5   #     #    5   #        #  # 13
   #++####     ####++####     ####++####     ####++#
14 #     #            E2                     #     # 14
   #     ####++##########++#++##########++####     #
15 #     +                                   +     # 15
   #################################################
     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15

Zhentil Keep is a major wealthy city at the western end of the Moonsea.  It is
famous for infighting by primarily evil factions.  The city is now wary about
the rebirth of one of its former rivals.  This outpost was built here partly to
keep an eye on New Phlan.

Porphyrys Cadorna proposes a treaty between the two cities so that New Phlan
can focus on rebuilding.  He does so by sending the party on a diplomatic
mission with a magically sealed diplomatic packet.  His end goal is to take
more power in New Phlan, which isn't a surprise, but his methods are: what he
actually proposes is an alliance between him and Zhentil Keep, with acceptance
to be signaled by the execution of the party -- which eliminates some powerful
rivals of Cadorna.  The Zhentarim will not know this until they read the entire
contents of the packet, so the party will be treated as guests under a
diplomatic flag of peace at first.

Random encounters: None, except after dinner and before the garrison has
  surrendered.  After you are attacked after dinner, the chance of a random
  combat is [random combats + 1] in 15.  The second such "combat" increments
  the counter, but in place of combat you will get the message 'There is great
  confusion as the guards run to their posts.'

  Combat is with [(5 * random combats) + 5] GUARD (#96), and [random combats
  + 2] CORPORAL (#54) who do not negotiate.  After six "combats" (five actual
  fights), the next encounter will be the one from location 3.

Resting: If you have not yet either met the commandant for dinner or defeated
  him in combat, resting will eventually result in you being led to dinner,
  even if you have attacked the guards and are outside your quarters.  After
  dinner, you will be disturbed by the next garrison random encounter described
  above.

Clearing the area: The diplomatic mission is flagged as successful if you
  enter and are taken to your room, then leave by any means other than
  surrendering.

Differences from the tabletop adventure: The map and theme are roughly the
  same.  The dinner conversation with the commandant is similar; you'd think it
  would be different with a human DM.  The high-level staff are fewer in number
  and less well armed in the Gold Box version.

E1 - Exit to Wilderness (3,32).

  When you first enter, you are introduced to the Commandant, then receive a
  brief tour of the outpost that ends at location 1.  You will not be permitted
  to wander freely, partly because the commandant does not want you to see that
  the outpost is lightly garrisoned and only appears strong.

  After dinner and before the garrison has surrendered, nearing the exit has a
  75% chance of an attack by 11 GUARD (#96) (Morale undefined, 25 XP).

E2 - You may climb over the wall here; this also exits to Wilderness (3,32).

1 - Your quarters.  When you first arrive here, you may either move around or
  wait for dinner:
  * If you move around:
    Leaving your quarters results in a prompt encounter with guards who demand
    you return.  They will not accept a "B"ribe.  If you attack, you fight 4
    GUARD (#96) (Morale 75, 9 XP).  You are given a chance to surrender after
    that:
    * If you "S"urrender: You lose all your money and items and are placed
      outside the outpost; this does not complete the mission.
    * If you "A"ttack them: You fight two waves of 4 CORPORAL (#54) and 16
      GUARD (Morale undefined, 68 XP).  You may then either return to your
      quarters as if nothing had happened, or leave the outpost (which will
      actually complete the mission, even if you do not defeat the commandant).
  * If you relax or rest:
    When it is time for dinner (14:00), you are led to location 2.

  Once you return from dinner, you have the option of going to sleep with or
  without a watch.  If you do not set a watch, one THAC0 7 attack on a random
  character is made that does 8d4+8 damage if it hits.  A two-wave combat then
  ensues (both combats are Morale 70 with a watch, 80 otherwise):
  * Wave 1: 4 AIDES (#53)
  * Wave 2: 5 CORPORAL (#54) and 6 AIDES (#53)

2 - Officers' mess.  This is where you dine with the commandant and his staff.
  He offers conversation with the party; there are two ways to get information
  out of him:
  * Discuss "M"agic, then "M"ention Pool of Radiance, which results in the
    commandant telling you a story (Journal Entry 46).
  * Discuss the "C"ity of "O"ld Phlan, which results in the commandant telling
    you a legendary old being called Tirantikus and Tyranthraxus are likely one
    and the same.
  Otherwise, all you can accomplish is to give the commandant information.

  Once dinner is complete, you are guided back to location 1.

3 - If you have not had dinner with the commandant, entering this square leads
  to an attack in two waves:
  * Wave 1: 1 DWARVEN FIGHTER (#48), 10 AIDES (#53), 12 CORPORAL (#54), and 25
    GUARD (#96) (Morale undefined, 710 XP).  The dwarven fighter carries
    Gauntlets of Ogre Power, Long Sword +1, and Chain Mail +1.
  * Wave 2: 1 COMMANDANT (#50), 1 AL-HYAM DAZID (#86), 20 AIDES (#53), and 24
    CORPORAL (#54) (Morale undefined, 2879 XP).  The commandant carries: Long
    Sword +1, Plate Mail +2, Shield +1, Ring of Fire Resistance, 3 Potion of
    Extra Healing, Javelin of Lightning (which will be used given a chance);
    his magic-user carries Bracers AC 3, Ring of Fire Resistance, and Wand of
    Lightning (20 charges).  (This is strange, because Al-Hyam Dazid isn't
    supposed to show up until Valjevo Castle.)
  After defeating the Commandant, all remaining troops in the outpost
  surrender.

4 - Gate to central keep.  This is impassable unless the party is being led.

5 - Barracks.  You may get attacked by guards in other versions of the game,
  though nothing happens in the IBM version.

SECTION 6.20 - Valhingen Graveyard
----------------------------------

     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15      ECL Script 10
   #################################################
 0 # S  S  S  S  S  S#  #                 '  #21   #  0  KEY:
   #                 #  #                 #  ####XX#
 1 # S  S  S  S  S  S#  #      17         #      20#  1  # wall
   #                 #++#######++#        ####''####     ' rubbled wall
 2 # S  S  S  S  S  S     S#18#  #                 #  2  + door/archway
   #                       #++#++#     #++#     ####     \ stair (behaves as
 3 # S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S#  #  #     #  #     #  #  3    a door)
   #                       #  #  #  ####  #######++#     X conditional passage
 4 +E1                 1  S#  \  #  #   22   # W   #  4
   #                       #######  ####  ####     #     E Entrance/exit
 5 # S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S# W 14  W  W#  # W  W  W#  5  S Skeleton Zone
   #              ##########''#++####  #  #        #     Z Zombie Zone
 6 # S  S  S  S   + 2   + 3# W#15#  # W#  # W  W 12#  6  W Wight Zone
   #              #######  #  #\\#  #######  ####++#
 7 # S  S  S  S  S  S   #  # W#16   # W  W  W#     #  7
   #                    #  #  #######        #  ####
 8 # S  S  S  S  S  S   #  # W#       W  W   #  +13#  8
   #              ##########  #              #######
 9 # S  S  S  S  S#    Z  Z 19# Z  Z  Z  Z  Z  Z  Z#  9
   #        #######++#        ####                 #
10 # S  S  S#  \ 8# 7# Z  Z  Z#  # Z  Z  Z  Z  Z  Z# 10
   #        #  #  #  #        #  ####              #
11 # S  S  S#  #  #  # Z  Z  Z#11   +    Z  Z  Z  Z# 11
   #        #++####++#        #  ####              #
12 # S  4  S#     \  # Z  Z  Z#  # Z  Z  Z  Z  Z  Z# 12
   ####++#  ##########        ####                 #
13 #    5# Z  Z  Z  Z  Z  Z  Z  Z  Z  Z  Z  Z  Z  Z# 13
   #     #                 #######                 #
14 #     # Z  Z  Z     Z  Z#     # Z  Z  Z  Z  Z  Z# 14
   #\\####     ####++#     #     #                 #
15 # 6   # Z  Z#     # Z  Z#   10\ 9  Z  Z  Z  Z  Z# 15
   #################################################
     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15

The graveyard has been overflowing with undead ever since the Flight of the
Wyrms.  The undead trouble the Boss, since he does not trust his clerics to
handle them (he fears they will control the undead and gain power against him),
and his regular mundane troops fare very poorly against higher-level undead.
The undead have started to cross the river into the main areas of Phlan (in the
tabletop version, something you may be forced to directly deal with), so the
council of New Phlan is also troubled, and tasks you with ending this threat --
it has already sent adventuring parties into the graveyard to no avail.

Preparation: Battling the undead here is not easy once you get past the
  skeletons and zombies.  You should have as many of the following as possible
  before coming here:
  * As many characters as possible should either know Fireball, or be level 6
    clerics.
  * Everyone should have a magical weapon, as higher-level undead are not
    damaged by mundane or even silver weaponry.
  * You will receive four scrolls each with two casts of Restoration when you
    accept the mission to clear the graveyard.  You will get four more if you
    complete the mission to rescue the heir of Bivant, and even more as you
    systematically explore this map.
  * Your front three fighters should have ideally recently gained a level (in
    any class); even if you cast Restoration after a level drain, that will
    still wipe out any progress you had made towards the next level.
  It also helps to cast buffs like Protection from Evil, Prayer, Enlarge, and
  Mirror Image before triggering a fixed combat with more powerful undead.

Undead scaling: The maximum number of many undead here scale to Party Strength.
  This is mostly calculated when you enter the graveyard, so you can exploit
  this by removing all equipment before entering and putting it back on.

  Anything not listed contributes nothing to kill scores, which have a floor
  of zero.

  * Skeletons: For each of Skeleton Zone random encounters and locations 1 and
    3, Skeleton Count is equal to Party Strength divided by 2, minus any
    Skeleton Kill Score from your last visit.  Skeleton Kill Score is tracked
    and capped at 254:
    * 1 for each randomly encountered skeleton in the Skeleton Zone
    * 5 for the spectre at location 6 (can reappear)
    * 5 for the vampire at location 21 (once only)

  * Zombies: For each of Zombie Zone random encounters and location 10, Zombie
    Count is equal to Party Strength divided by 4, minus any Zombie Kill Score
    from your last visit.  Zombie Kill Score is tracked and capped at 254:
    * 1 for each randomly encountered zombie in the Zombie Zone
    * 5 for the spectre at location 8 (can reappear)
    * 5 for the vampire at location 21 (once only)

  * Wights: For each of Wight Zone random encounters and location 14, Wight
    Count is equal to Party Strength divided by 8, minus any Wight Kill Score
    from your last visit.  Wight Kill Score is tracked and capped at 254:
    * 1 for each randomly encountered wight in the Wight Zone
    * 1 for each wight at location 14 (once only)
    * 5 for the spectre at location 16 (can reappear)
    * 5 for the vampire at location 21 (once only)

  * Spectres: Spectres do not appear randomly, but any spectre may reappear if
    you leave the map and return.  Spectre Kill Score is tracked:
    * 1 for each spectre at locations 6, 8, 16, or 17 (all can reappear)
    * 5 for the vampire at location 21 (once only)

Regenerating encounters: Many fixed encounters can happen again if you leave
  and return.  Fixed encounters that may only happen once ever are marked with
  an asterisk.

Random encounters: If the area has not been cleared, you will encounter the
  appropriate monsters in the zones labeled on the map.

  * Skeleton Zone: Random encounter chance is 20%, against [Skeleton Count]
    SKELETON (#34).

  * Zombie Zone: Random encounter chance is 20%, or 40% in Search mode, against
    [Zombie Count] ZOMBIE (#35).

  * Wight Zone: Random encounter chance is 20%, or 40% in Search mode, against:
    * [Wight Count] WIGHT (#20), maximum of 4 per combat
    * [4 * Number of Wights] ZOMBIE (#35)
    * Random third monster:
      * 40% chance of 2 JUJU ZOMBIE (#29)
      * 40% chance of 2 GHOUL (#72)
      * 20% chance of 1 MUMMY (#114)
    The combination of wights and mummies is especially dangerous; the wights
    also do not have the decency to attack all at once.

  They will attack immediately if they surprise you; otherwise:
  * "F"lee: The monsters flee first if 'You have managed to sneak up on' the
    undead.  Otherwise, the success rate is determined by comparing your
    slowest party member to 6 for zombies, or 12 for other undead.
  * "P"arley: This will cause you to lose surprise if you surprised the undead,
    and start combat if you did not.

Fleeing: Your party is moved to one of: (1,6); (1,9); (7,4); (14,6); (14,9).

Resting: It is safe to rest if the graveyard has been cleared.  Otherwise,
  every 5 minutes there is a 4% chance you are disturbed by [Party Strength
  divided by 1d3] GHOUL (#72).

Clearing the area: The area is considered cleared once you have defeated the
  vampire for good at location 22.  Doing this requires first defeating the
  vampire at location 21, which in turn requires defeating the spectres at
  locations 16 and 17.  Defeating the spectres at locations 6 and 8 is not
  required.

Differences from the tabletop adventure: The overall theme is similar, but the
  maps are very different; the Gold Box version replaces a lot of the treasure
  with a bunch of extra scrolls of Restoration spells; undead growth scales to
  Party Strength in the Gold Box version but is exponential (!) with the
  passage of time in the tabletop version.

All monsters here have Morale 101.

E1 - Exit to Wilderness (26,26).

1 - Skeletal hands erupt from graves; this triggers an attack that is the same
  as being forced into combat in a random encounter in the Skeleton Zone.

2* - This mausoleum is guarded by 15 SKELETON (#34) (47 XP).

3* - The inner mausoleum is guarded by 1 GIANT SKELETON (#22) and [Skeleton
  Count, but only if at least 17] SKELETON (#34)

  Once defeated, if you search, you find a treasure worth 5095 XP containing 12
  jewelry, 10 gems, 69 gold, 28 silver, and 4 Clerical Scrolls (Restoration,
  Restoration).

4* - 30 SKELETON (#34) (95 XP) guard the outside of this tower.

5 - 'Noxious fumes tear at your throat as you crunch through piles of dried
  bones.'  Every party member must either successfully save vs. poison, or take
  10 damage.

6 - 1 SPECTRE (#17) is responsible for raising skeletons; defeating it yields
  2234 XP and its treasure of 3 jewelry, 555 platinum, and 2000 gold.

  The spectre and its treasure reappear every time you enter the graveyard if
  Skeleton Count is not zero.

7* - 15 ZOMBIE (#35) (100 XP) guard the outside of this tower.

8 - 1 SPECTRE (#17) is responsible for raising zombies; defeating it yields
  1516 XP and its treasure of 13 gems, 542 platinum, and 1111 gold.

  The spectre and its treasure reappear every time you enter the graveyard if
  Zombie Count is not zero.

9* - 25 ZOMBIE (#35) (166 XP) guard the outside of this mausoleum.

10* - This mausoleum is guarded by 1 JUJU ZOMBIE (#29), plus 15 ZOMBIE (#35)
  if Zombie Count is at least 16.

  After combat, you find a treasure worth 1020 XP containing 110 gold, 290
  silver, Wand of Lightning Bolt (3 charges), Potion of Healing, and 2 Clerical
  Scrolls (Restoration, Restoration).

11 - This mausoleum is guarded by up to [Party Strength divided by 16, minimum
  1] MUMMY (#114).

  There is no treasure here, and this is a difficult combat, so this combat
  should be avoided, but if you insist ... It helps to cast Protection from
  Evil, Prayer, and Shield spells before this combat to prevent too many
  characters getting paralyzed by the mummy fear aura.  You should also have
  Cure Disease prepared to get rid of disease immediately after combat.
  Fireball does reliable damage, and Lightning Bolt sometimes does incredible
  damage (which is strange).

12* - 'You stand before a huge tower.  The single entrance is locked and
  strongly built.  Warning voices cry from within.  "We are the spirits of
  those who fought the dragons.  Leave us or die."'

  If you do not, you are forced into a combat set up as a Wight Zone random
  combat with 4 wights, without any checks for Wight Kill Score.

13* - This crypt is guarded by a wraith, who says it is the protector of the
  paladin here, and warns you to leave; if you do not, you fight 1 WRAITH (#21)
  (119 XP).  You may then loot the paladin's remains for treasure, for 600 XP,
  Hammer +3, Sling of Seeking +2, Potion of Extra Healing, Clerical Scroll
  (Restoration, Restoration), and Magic-User Scroll (Slow, Hold Person,
  Invisibility 10' Radius).

  This treasure and the treasure from location 18 probably were meant to be
  swapped.  Location 18 actually has items a paladin would be expected to
  have; the knight there is grants treasure useful for each of the four major
  classes in the tabletop version, which is what you get here.

14* - The outside of this tower is guarded by [Wight Count] WIGHT (#20).

  A late-game party may find 15+ wights here; be prepared.

15 - 'The lower chamber is filled with glass and fur objects of all types.'
  Every party member must either successfully save vs. rod/staff/wand or take 4
  damage.

16 - 1 SPECTRE (#17) is responsible for raising wights; defeating it yields
  2234 XP and its treasure of 3 jewelry, 555 platinum, and 2000 gold.

  The spectre and its treasure reappear every time you enter the graveyard if
  Wight Count is not zero.

17 - 2 SPECTRE (#17) (676 XP) guard the outside of this crypt.

18* - The spirit of the dead knight resting here gives his equipment to the
  party, worth 800 XP: Plate Mail +2, Long Sword +2 (alignment lawful good;
  anyone not lawful good who tries to equip this sword takes 15 damage), Ring
  of Fire Resistance, Shield +1, 4 Clerical Scroll (Restoration, Restoration).

19* - If you have ever defeated the spectres at locations 16 and 17, but have
  not yet defeated the vampire, you are approached by a LEVEL 6 MU (#24) who
  asks to join the party to help end the foul undead curse.
  * If you "L"et him join, he will tell you where the vampire is hiding.
    However, he will immediately betray the party in the very next combat, as
    he is actually an agent of Tyranthraxus.  You can then make him friendly by
    casting Charm Person on him, although you will run into the problem that he
    does not truly know any spells.
  * If you "S"end him away, he immediately attacks you (181 XP).
  He carries a Ring of Protection +2.

20 - You may walk through the northern wall here if you have ever defeated the
  spectres at locations 16 and 17.  The magic-user from location 19 will
  tell you this if he is with you.

21* - The vampire who is behind all the undead in the graveyard is hidden here,
  and attacks immediately: 1 VAMPIRE (#23), 3 WOLF (#106) (763 XP).  If the
  magic-user from location 19 is with you, he will join the vampire against you
  here.

  If someone is carrying the Efreeti Bottle found in the Kobold Caves, the
  efreet emerges to fight on your side: 1 EFREETI (#70).  This does not consume
  the bottle, though the efreeti can only appear once.  The efreet isn't
  particularly helpful because the combat is too congested for it to
  contribute much.

  In addition to casting buffs like Mirror Image and Protection from Evil to
  protect yourself against the vampire's level-draining attack, you also want
  some counter to its charming gaze: cast buffs to improve saving throws, and
  have Charm Person or Dispel Magic prepared to counter the gaze if it takes
  effect.

  Lawful good holy symbols do not appear to have any effect against the
  vampire.  (Though that might be because I tried a holy symbol of Tyr, an
  actual lawful good god, instead of Tempus as the clue book suggests in one
  place -- Tempus is actually neutral.)

  Should you defeat the vampire, it will turn to mist and flee to location 22.
  If you search afterwards, you will find its treasure (3133 XP): 12 gems, 9000
  gold, Wand of Magic Missiles (33 charges), 3 Potion of Healing, Shield +1,
  and 5 Clerical Scrolls (Restoration, Restoration).

22* - If you come here before you defeat the vampire at location 21:
  You find a coffin surrounded with broken crosses (despite the cross being
  Christian and not a symbol of any god of the Forgotten Realms) and spilled
  vials of holy water, and a scroll.  If you read the scroll, it is Journal
  Entry 43.  You may then either sanctify or overturn the coffin.  The latter
  does nothing.

  If you come here after you defeat the vampire at location 21, the vampire has
  returned to its coffin, and you must fight it:
  * If you either sanctified the coffin, or you have not left the graveyard
    after defeating the vampire once: fight 1 VAMPIRE (#105) (663 XP).  It is
    alone this time, and only has 1/3 of its starting hit points.
  * If you failed to sanctify the coffin *and* left the graveyard after
    defeating the vampire once, the vampire was able to recover its strength:
    fight 1 VAMPIRE (#23) and 15 WOLF (#106) (941 XP).
  If someone is carrying the Efreeti Bottle found in the Kobold Caves, but the
  efreet has not yet emerged from it, it now comes out to fight on your side: 1
  EFREETI (#70).

  Defeating the vampire a second time defeats it for good.  This will clear the
  area, and will also empty out the entire graveyard of anything remaining,
  whether undead or treasure.

SECTION 6.21 - Stojanow Gate
----------------------------

     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15      ECL Script 9
   #############++###################++#############
 0 #     #     #E2#  #  #     #      E2            #  0  KEY:
   #     #     #  #  #  #++####  #++#############  #
 1 #     #     #  #  +           #     #     #  #  #  1  # wall
   #     #++####  ####  #######  #######     #  #  #     + door/archway
 2 #     +     +  #  +  #     #  #     #     #  +  #  2  \ stairway
   #######     #  #  #  #     #  #++####++#######  #
 3 #     +     #  #  #  #     #                    #  3  E Entrance/exit
   #############  ####  ####++#              #######
 4 #                                         +     #  4
   #                                         #     #
 5 #                        2a               #     #  5
   #        ####\\#######     #######\\####  #######
 6 #        ####\\#######  5  #######\\####        #  6
   #############\\#######+++++#######\\#############
 7 ##########    6      # 4b  #       7   ##########  7
   ##########           #     #           ##########
 8 ##########           #     #           ##########  8
   ##########           #+++++#           ##########
 9 #  # 3  3#           # 4a  #           # 3  3  3#  9
   #  #     #############     #############        #
10 #  +    3  3  3  3  2  2  2  2  3  3  3  3      # 10
   #######                                   ####++#
11 #     #             2  2  2  2            +     # 11
   #     #  ####  ####           #######  ####     #
12 #     +  #  +  #  #           #     #  +  #     # 12
   #######  ####  #  ####  ####++#     #  #  #######
13 #     +        +     +  #     #     +  #  #     # 13
   #     ####++#  #######  #############  ####     #
14 #     #     # 1+     +  +        + 1      +     # 14
   #++##########  #     #  #        #  #++#  ####++#
15 #            E1#     #  #        #E1#  #        # 15
   #############++###################++#############
     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15

The Stojanow Gate guards the only approach to Valjevo Castle by land.  (Isn't
it a shame you cannot cast Fly or Water Walk in these games?)  When the time is
ripe, the council tasks you with infiltrating the gate and capturing it; the
city's military can then garrison the gate itself.

Random encounters: None, unless you set off the alarm in Valjevo Castle; you
  can then encounter patrols north of the gate, which works the same way it
  does in Valjevo Castle.  (You can also set off an alarm here, but that alarm
  does not actually do anything, even though it is supposed to.)

Resting: It is safe to rest anywhere (even if you are in the middle of
  crashing the gate and the tower guards are sending arrows and rocks your
  way), unless you set off the alarm in Valjevo Castle; in that case, rest
  north of the gate may be interrupted by a random encounter.

Clearing the block: To clear this block, you must defeat both the bugbear
  patrol in front of the gate, and the guards from both of the two towers.  You
  will get a message about guards from Phlan arriving and garrisoning the gate
  when this happens.

Differences from the tabletop adventure: The tabletop version has hobgoblins
  patrolling instead of bugbears, but actually has a defense against flying
  PCs.  It otherwise works similarly.  (The river is so polluted that boats
  cannot cross; that pretty much has to be magical, because if that were to
  occur in real life you wouldn't even be able to get close to the river, which
  you are allowed to do here without harm.  Stopping Yarash from polluting the
  river also doesn't fix the pollution here.)

E1 - Exit to Podal Plaza.

E2 - Exit to Valjevo Castle Southwest Quadrant.

1 - If it is currently day, a passing man driving a wagon full of equipment
  will offer to sell his wagon to you for 250 gold; you cannot haggle lower
  than this.  If you pay, he tells you about how the gate is guarded.  If you
  are feeling poor or unheroic, you can also kill the man and take the wagon by
  force.

2 - Bugbear patrol area that consists of 15 BUGBEAR (#63) (Morale 60, 533 XP):
  * If the bugbears are alive, and you have the wagon from location 1:
    The bugbears may act as if you are supposed to take supplies through the
    gate.  This is a roll that has a success rate of:
    * 0% if you have made the bugbears permanently hostile, or if you are
      coming from the north;
    * 90% if you have never made the bugbears suspicious;
    * 70% if you have made the bugbears suspicious during this visit to
      Stojanow Gate;
    * 80% otherwise.

    If the roll succeeds:
      The bugbears believe you are taking supplies through the gate.  They ask
      a 15 gold fee; if you agree, you are taken to location 2a north of the
      gate.  If you do not, roll again; this time, if the roll succeeds, the
      bugbears become permanently hostile.
    If the roll fails:
      The bugbears declare the party impostors and demand surrender.  You may:
      * "F"lee to a location south of the gate (which always works)
      * "S"urrender (all your money and some items are lost; works as "F"lee
        otherwise)
      * "A"ttack
      If you have not made the bugbears permanently hostile, you can "F"lee and
      try again; otherwise your only real option is to "A"ttack them.

  * If the bugbears are alive, but you do not have the wagon from location 1:
    You are first warned to stay away from the wall; this makes the bugbears
    suspicious of you.  If you continue to move around here, the bugbears
    confront you; you may either "A"ttack them or "T"ake the punch (1d3 damage
    to one character if it hits).  Either way, the bugbears become permanently
    hostile.

  * If the bugbears are dead, but the tower guards are still alive:
    Arrows are fired at you from the guard towers (2 THAC0 16 attacks on random
    characters, 1d6 damage per hit).

3 - This behaves as location 2, except since you aren't trying to go through
  the gate, no check is made for the wagon.

4a/4b - If you enter this location from a direction other than north: You can
  sometimes "B"ash down or "P"ick the lock of this massive gate, but the Knock
  spell always works.  If the gate hasn't yet been opened, you are not being
  led through, and the tower guards are still alive, the tower guards throw
  rocks at the party (16 THAC0 17 attacks on random characters, 1d6 damage per
  hit) every time you try to open the gate.  You can move east and west to
  renew the options to "B"ash or "P"ick open the gate if you don't succeed at
  first.

  If you enter location 4b after killing both sets of tower guards, but the
  bugbear patrol is still alive, the bugbears confront you here.  Attempting to
  "F"lee crashes the game; any other option starts combat with the bugbear
  patrol.  Winning this combat clears the block.

5 - If you have killed the bugbear patrol, and some tower guards are still
  alive, the tower guards confront you.  You can "F"lee to the southern side of
  the map; any other option starts combat with 2 LEVEL 6 MU (#24), 2 AIDES
  (#53), and 6 ETTIN (#71) (Morale 80, 3042 XP); this happens even if you've
  killed one set of tower guards (but not both), and even though the magic-
  users in the towers aren't actually the same.  Each of the level 6 magic-
  users carries a Ring of Protection +2.  Winning this combat clears the block.

6 - Western guard tower.  Two humans and three ettins are here, and one of the
  humans openly wonders when the assault on New Phlan will actually take place.
  You may "F"lee back down the stairs or "A"dvance closer to them; "C"ombat or
  "P"arley start combat with 1 5TH LVL MU (#89), 1 AIDES (#53), and 3 ETTIN
  (#71) (Morale 50, 1371 XP).

7 - Eastern guard tower.  Two humans and three ettins are here, and one of the
  humans talks about how the Boss threw an unruly subordinate through a
  trapdoor to a medusa.  You may "F"lee back down the stairs or "A"dvance
  closer to them; "C"ombat or "P"arley start combat with 1 LEVEL 6 MU (#24), 1
  AIDES (#53), and 3 ETTIN (#71) (Morale 50, 1521 XP).  The level 6 magic-user
  carries a Ring of Protection +2.

SECTION 6.22 - Valjevo Castle
-----------------------------

     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15      NORTHWEST QUADRANT
   #################################################     KEY:
 0 #           #  #     #           #  #           #  0
   #           #  #     #           #  #           #     # wall
 1 #           #  #8b   #   20      #  +           #  1  + door/archway
   ##########++#  #++#######++#######  #############
 2 #18   #         8a                              #  2  E Entrance/exit
   #     #                                         #
 3 #   17+         8a                            E3+  3
   #######     #####################################
 4 #           #                                      4
   #++#++#     #
 5 #19#19#     #                                      5
   #######     #
 6 #     #     #                                      6
   #     #     #
 7 #   16+     +                                      7
   #     #   E6+
 8 #     #     +                                      8
   #######     #
 9 #     #     #    Hedge maze: See next section      9
   #     #     #    for map and details.
10 #     +     #                                     10
   #######     #
11 #           #                                     11
   #######     #
12 #     #     #                                     12
   #     #++#  #
13 #      5a#  #                                     13
   #        #  #
14 #      6a#  #                                     14
   #        #  #
15 #        #E4#                                     15
   ##########++#
     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15

     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15      NORTHEAST QUADRANT
   #################################################     KEY:
 0 #           #  #     #   22      #  #           #  0
   #           #  #     #           #  #           #     # wall
 1 #           #  #9b   #      21   #  #           #  1  + door/archway
   #           #  #++##########++####  #++##########
 2 #           +   9a                        +     #  2  E Entrance/exit
   #############                             # 23  #
 3 +E2             9a                        #     #  3
   #####################################     #######
 4                                     #           #  4
                                       #     #######
 5                                     #     #     #  5
                                       #     #     #
 6                                     #     #     #  6
                                       #     #     #
 7                                     #     #   24#  7
                                       #     ####++#
 8                                     #           #  8
                                       #     ####++#
 9     Hedge maze: See next section    #     #   25#  9
       for map and details.            #     #     #
10                                     #     #     # 10
                                       #     #######
11                                     #           # 11
                                       #     #######
12                                     #     +26   # 12
                                       #     #     #
13                                     #     #     # 13
                                       #  ####     #
14                                     #  #        # 14
                                       #  #        #
15                                     #E5#        # 15
                                       #++##########
     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15

     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15      SOUTHWEST QUADRANT
   ##########++#                                         KEY:
 0 #   11   #E2#                                      0
   #        #  #                                         # wall
 1 #        #  #                                      1  + door/archway
   #     ####  #
 2 #   10+     #                                      2  E Entrance/exit
   #     #     #
 3 #     #     #                                      3
   #######     #
 4 #           #                                      4
   #######     #
 5 #     #     #    Hedge maze: See next section      5
   #     #     #    for map and details.
 6 # 4   #     #                                      6
   #++####     #
 7 #           #                                      7
   #++####     #
 8 #     #     #                                      8
   #     #     #
 9 #     #     #                                      9
   #     #     #
10 #     #     #                                     10
   #######     #
11 #           #                                     11
   #######     #####################################
12 #     #                                       E5+ 12
   #  3  #                             #############
13 #     +                             + 1         # 13
   ##########++#  ####++##########++#  #           #
14 #           #  #           #     #  #           # 14
   #     2     #  #           #     #  #           #
15 #           #E1#           #     #E1#           # 15
   #############++###################++#############
     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15

     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15      SOUTHEAST QUADRANT
                                       #++##########     KEY:
 0                                     #E3#        #  0
                                       #  #        #     # wall
 1                                     #  #        #  1  ~ pool
                                       #  #        #     + door/archway
 2                                     #  #        #  2
                                       #  ####     #     E Entrance/exit
 3                                     #     +15   #  3
                                       #     #######
 4                                     #           #  4
                                       #     #######
 5      Hedge maze: See next section   #     +     #  5
        for map and details.           #     #     #
 6                                     #     #     #  6
                                       #     #######
 7                                     +     #   6c#  7
                                       +E6   #     #
 8                                     +     +5c   #  8
                                       #     #  ####
 9                                     #     #  #~~#  9
                                       #     ####~~#
10                                     #     #13#14# 10
                                       #     #++#++#
11                                     #           # 11
   #####################################     #######
12 +E4                                  7b 7b+7a   # 12
   #                                         #     #
13 #                                         #     # 13
   #############  #######++#######++#  #++##########
14 #           +  #      5b   #   11#  #           # 14
   #           #  #           #     #  #           #
15 #           #  #   6b      #     #  #           # 15
   #################################################
     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15

The ancient stronghold of Valjevo Castle has now been occupied by the Boss,
Tyranthraxus.  He has set up numerous defenses around the castle's inner tower,
with a heavy garrison surrounding a hedge maze.  The garrison's weakness is
that it is primarily composed of humanoids who aren't exactly models of
competence.

Alarm: If you do something suspicious or aggressive, you may set off the alarm.
  This lasts for 60-120 minutes, and activates random encounters.  You can wait
  out the alarm in one of the safe locations listed below.

Random encounters: None, unless the alarm is active and you are not in one of
  locations 3, 4, 10 to 12, 17, or 23; then the chance of encountering a patrol
  is 1 in 21, or 1 in 3 in Search mode, with probability halved if you are
  indoors.

  A patrol consists of 1 6TH LVL FIGHTER (#75) and 5 HILL GIANT (#55) (Morale
  60, 3380 XP).  If you stole anything from the altar of Bane at location 11,
  you may be immediately attacked.  If not, you may "F"lee; "P"arleying will
  start combat if not disguised, or if you stole anything from the altar of
  Bane.  Otherwise, "S"ly or "N"ice start combat; "M"eek causes the guards to
  ask for a password, which is HARASH; "H"aughty or "A"busive causes the guards
  to ask for your authority, which is TYRANTHRAXUS.  Failure to give the
  correct response will start combat.

Resting: It is always safe to rest in locations 3, 4, 10 to 12, 17, and 23.
  It is also safe to rest anywhere else, unless the alarm is active; you then
  have a 17% chance every 5 minutes of having rest disturbed by a patrol.

Differences from the tabletop adventure: The map layouts are nearly identical,
  and the overall theme is the same, but monsters in the Gold Box version are
  generally harder (like gnolls being replaced with fire giants) and the
  magical treasures are generally less powerful.

E1 - Exit to Stojanow Gate.

E2 - To Valjevo Castle Northwest Quadrant.

E3 - To Valjevo Castle Northeast Quadrant.

E4 - To Valjevo Castle Southwest Quadrant.

E5 - To Valjevo Castle Southeast Quadrant.

E6 - Entrance to Valjevo Castle Hedge Maze.  If you have not given the tower
  guards (whom you can't reach) at this gate a reason to be suspicious, they
  ask for a password.
  * Give the password: If Cadorna is with you, he slips you a note with it in
    Dethek.  RHODIA is correct and permits free passage.  An incorrect password
    does not arouse suspicion, and gives you a chance to "B"ash, "P"ick, or
    cast "K"nock the door, which still does not arouse suspicion.  (I wasn't
    kidding about the guards' lack of competence.)  The first two might work
    but are unreliable; the Knock spell always works.
  * Force the gate open: The guards throw boulders at the party (12 THAC0 12
    attacks on random characters, 2d6 damage per hit) and set off the alarm
    (this does not cause you to lose disguise); then you get a chance to
    "B"ash, "P"ick or cast "K"nock as above.

  If you have either ever tried to force your way through this gate (the guards
  won't know if you tried forcing your way through the other one), or stolen
  anything from the altar of Bane at location 11, the guards will be
  suspicious: the result is as if you had tried to "force the gate open".

1 - Washerwomen cower from the party, then recognize the party as strangers and
  decide you are therefore here to kill Tyranthraxus.  (That's an interesting
  leap of logic.)  A half-orc woman approaches you.

  The women will offer to disguise you, regardless of attitude.  You can choose
  whether or not to put on the disguise, which will help you evade enemy
  patrols.  Afterwards:
  * if you "T"ie them up, that avoids the negative repercussions of a "H"aughty
    or "A"busive attitude;
  * if you unheroically "K"ill them, there is a 20% chance you make noise, both
    setting off the alarm and canceling your disguise;
  * if you simply "L"eave, a "H"aughty attitude will cause your disguise to not
    work.  An "A"busive attitude will additionally set off the alarm.

2 - Smithy.  Between 0:00 and 14:59, a smith and three fire giants work here.
  If you "P"arley with him and choose either "S"ly or "A"busive, the smith
  recognizes your party as intruders and attacks: 1 4TH LVL FIGHTER (#41) and
  3 FIRE GIANT (#56) (Morale 30, 4018 XP).  The smith carries a Long Sword +1
  and Chain Mail +1.

  If you defeat the smith and the fire giants, or if you come here after 15:00,
  you may take any of the nonmagical weapons or armor here; there is one of
  each common item.

3 - Coal storehouse.  This is always a safe place to rest.

4 - Smokehouse.  This is always a safe place to rest.

5 - This barracks is empty at night, but during the day you will encounter its
  hill giant soldiers.  If you "F"lee you will set off the alarm and lose your
  disguise.  "W"ait or "P"arley will start combat: 8 HILL GIANT (#55)
  (Morale 40, 5191 XP).  Your party receives bonuses of +2 to hit and damage if
  the giants are 'putting on their armor', or +5 if they are 'struggling out of
  bed.'

6 - If you search here, you will find treasure: 1 XP, 11 gold.

7 - Hill giant guard.  If you are disguised, you may pass through location 7b
  without them noticing, but not location 7a where they are stationed.

  If they do notice you, and you stole anything from the altar of Bane at
  location 11, they immediately attack you and set off the alarm: fight 2 HILL
  GIANT (#55) (Morale 50, 1297 XP).

  If you start "C"ombat yourself, this will set off the alarm, but you will not
  lose your disguise.

  The giants will otherwise ask for a password.  You may either act "H"aughty
  and give your authority as TYRANTHRAXUS, or give the password HARASH with any
  other attitude, and they will let you go.  Otherwise, they attack you (same
  effect as "C"ombat).

8 - If you pass through location 8a while disguised, and you haven't killed the
  6TH LVL FIGHTER (#75) (Morale 100, 136 XP; carries Long Sword +1) here, he
  confronts you:
  * "C"ombat: He pushes a button and warns you that a patrol is coming.  Either
    choice triggers the alarm and causes you to lose your disguise.  If you
    "S"tay and fight him instead of "R"un, after the combat you are immediately
    confronted by a patrol.
  * "F"lee: You successfully get away, but set off the alarm and lose your
    disguise.
  * "W"ait or "P"arley: "S"ly or "N"ice set off the alarm, but don't cause you
    to lose your disguise.  If you act "M"eek and give the password HARASH, or
    act "H"aughty or "A"busive and give your authority as TYRANTHRAXUS, he lets
    you go without incident.  An incorrect response behaves the same as
    "C"ombat.

  If you pass through location 8a while not disguised, the alarm goes off.

  If you enter location 8b and the fighter is still alive, he immediately
  attacks you (Morale 50), setting off the alarm, though this does not cause
  you to lose any disguise.

9 - This is similar to location 8, but the 6TH LVL FIGHTER (#84) (336 XP) may
  be helped by the fire giants from location 21.  If you attempt to pass
  through location 9a while not disguised, the fire giants will charge you; the
  only way to avoid combat is to "F"lee, which sets off the alarm.  If you
  attack the fighter in location 9b, you can catch him without the fire giants.

10 - Temple of Bane.  A priest and two acolytes ask you to accept Bane's
  blessing.
  * "A"ccept blessing: All non-evil characters take 2d10+2 damage; the last
    character in your party may get hit two extra times.  If anyone took
    damage, the priest then recognizes the party as impostors; this behaves as
    if you had tried to "L"eave.
  * "T"alk: The priest insists you accept the blessing of Bane.
  * "L"eave: The priest declares you impostors, and throws a sphere from his
    Necklace of Missiles at the party.  First, every character who fails to
    make a saving throw vs. magic takes 15 damage; then, every character takes
    15 damage.  The priest and his acolytes then attack you, as if you had
    tried to "K"ill them.
  * "K"ill them: You fight 1 LEVEL 5 CLERIC (#91) and 2 1ST LVL CLERIC (#90)
    (Morale 100, 450 XP).  The level 5 cleric carries a Mace +3, Plate Mail +1,
    and a Necklace of Missiles (6 charges).

11 - Altar of Bane.  If you loot the offering box, you can get 37 silver, but
  all characters will take 2d10+2 damage.  You may then take the two crossed
  swords; if you choose to, they are worth 400 XP, and both are Long Swords +3
  (alignment lawful evil; anyone not lawful evil who tries to equip such a
  sword takes 5 damage).

  If you take anything from here, many guards in the castle will recognize you
  as blasphemers on sight and be automatically hostile.  Additionally, if you
  take the swords, any disguise from location 1 will no longer work.

12 - The first time you enter this room, the ceiling caves in (physical attack
  on a random character, 2d6 damage if it hits).  This is always a safe place
  to rest.

13 - If you have been rewarded for completing the diplomatic mission to the
  Zhentil Keep Outpost (commission #13), Porphyrys Cadorna is chained in this
  cell:
  * "R"elease him: He will be grateful and allow you to take him with you if
    you so choose.
  * "L"eave him: He will beg and volunteer information three times before you
    can actually do so, and threaten to set off the alarm.  If you finally do
    leave, the alarm actually does go off, and you will lose any disguise you
    have.
  * "K"ill him: He will beg and volunteer information once before you can
    actually do so.  This does not truly accomplish anything; the Phlan clerk
    will recognize that you did it, but recognition is all that happens.  (The
    sequels behave as if he had died here.)

14 - A well.  If you try to move into it, you get the option to dive in.  Your
  chosen character needs at least Constitution 12 to have any chance of
  reaching the bottom; if you do, you find treasure: 133 XP, Long Sword +2
  Flame Tongue.  Your character then makes another check against Constitution +
  movement; a failure causes 1d6 damage from breathing in water.

15 - 5 GIANT SNAKE (#60) (Morale 100, 216 XP) lair here.  You can't avoid
  combat.

16 - You may catch the giants who live here sleeping; you may either sneak out,
  or attack them as they sleep.  If you choose the latter, you step on a loose
  creaky floorboard so you can't actually surprise them, and fight [4 during
  the day, 2 at night] FIRE GIANT (#56) (Morale 100, 2568 or 5136 XP).

  Otherwise, the giants have set a small trap by the door; if you fail to
  detect it with Search mode, a bucket falls on the party (THAC0 10 attack on a
  random character, 1d4 damage if it hits).  You may "F"lee, but it sets off
  the alarm and causes you to lose any disguise; all other options lead to
  combat as above.

17 - Officers' quarters.  The officer is not present, but 2 HILL GIANT (#55)
  (Morale 50, 1297 XP) are and confront you.  You may "F"lee, but it sets off
  the alarm and causes you to lose any disguise.  If you "P"arley with any
  attitude they will bother you no further.

  After you deal with the giants, this is always a safe place to rest.

18 - If you search here, you find treasure: 100 XP, 200 gold, Potion of Speed.

19 - Latrine.

20 - Mess hall.

21 - Fire giant barracks; the giants look up at you:
  * "C"ombat: Fight 4 FIRE GIANT (#56) (Morale 80, 5136 XP).
  * "F"lee: You set off the alarm and lose any disguise you may have.
  * "P"arley: If the alarm has gone off and you are undisguised, this starts a
    fight.  Otherwise, a "H"aughty or "S"ly attitude gets the giants to show
    you the list of passwords from location 22.  "N"ice or "M"eek attitudes
    lead to the giants telling you to get lost; "S"taying will start combat.
    An "A"busive attitude will also start combat.

22 - You can search here to find the password list, if the fire giants did not
  already show it to you.  It has the patrol password HARASH written in Espruar
  and the gate password RHODIA written in Dethek.

23 - Armory.  You may take any of the nonmagical weapons or armor here; there
  is one of each common item, and the supply is inexhaustible.  This is also
  always a safe place to rest.

24 - Kitchen.  A gnoll overseer watches three human slaves:
  * Kill the overseer and free the slaves: The gnoll tries to run but doesn't
    make it.  One of the slaves gratefully shows you a pieces of paper from
    the gnoll, with RHODIA written upon it in Dethek, and says that it is the
    password to enter the deadly hedge maze.
  * Go back outside: If you are not disguised, this sets off the alarm.
  * Talk to the overseer: The first time, the overseer threatens you with
    boiling oil.  After that, he makes good on the threat (THAC0 10 attack on a
    random character, 2d6 damage if it hits).

25 - Records office.  You can spend hours reading the records.  If you do:
  * If the alarm is currently active, there is a 50% chance a patrol will come
    by.
  * If it is 0:00 to 17:59, there is a 15% chance that a scribe will walk in.
    If 'He drops his books and runs out the door', this will set off the alarm,
    but will not cause you to lose any disguise.

  If neither of those happens, you can learn:
  * The red wizards of Thay are allied to Tyranthraxus.  You'll get to see
    them in later games in the series, just not this one.
  * Tyranthraxus got his start leading poorly organized humans, but is now
    much better organized.
  * He seeks to conquer all lands south of the Moonsea.  (Everything in this
    game takes place north of the Moonsea.  You'll get to travel south of the
    Moonsea in Curse of the Azure Bonds.)

26 - Scribes' office.  If you enter between 0:00 and 17:59, you will encounter
  six scribes working under the supervision of two officers.  The two officers
  will confront you (if you are not disguised, any response will set off the
  alarm):
  * "C"ombat: Fight 2 ENVOY (#87) (Morale 100, 433 XP), who each carries a
    Two-Handed Sword +2.
  * "F"lee: You set off the alarm and lose any disguise you may have.
  * "P"arley: If you are not disguised, the officers attack you.  Otherwise, if
    you act "M"eek and give the password HARASH, or act "H"aughty or "A"busive
    and give your authority as TYRANTHRAXUS, they leave you alone.  Anything
    else causes them to attack you.
  If you have defeated the officers, you can search the office and find:
  * A report indicating that the northern barbarians want a strong leader, and
    that the chief of the Raven clan is already allied to Tyranthraxus.
  * Hard evidence that Cadorna has been using the party for his own ends and
    seeks the Pool of Radiance for himself.  (Reading this is one of the ways
    to prove that Porphyrys Cadorna is a traitor.)
  * A quote from Tyranthraxus: "Do not be fooled by outward forms for you shall
    know me by my flaming aura."

SECTION 6.23 - Valjevo Castle Hedge Maze
----------------------------------------

     4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15  0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11
   #########################################################################
 4 #    1+                    "        +  "                          + 2   #  4
   #     #  """"""""""""""""  "  "  """#  "  "  """"  """"  """""""""####  #
 5 #     #                 "  "  "     #  "  "     "  "     "  "     #     #  5
   #  ####  """""""  """"  """"  """"  #  "  """"  "  "  """""""  """#######
 6 #  ####     "  "     "  "  "     "  #  "  "     "  "           "        #  6
   #######"""  "  """"  "  "  """"  """#  """"  """"  "  """"""""""  "  "  #
 7 +           "     "  "  "     "     #        "  "  "  "           "  "  #  7
   +E1   """"""""""  "  "  """"  """"  #  """""""  "  """"  """"""""""  "  #
 8 +                 "  "              #  "        "  "     "           "  #  8
   #  "  """""""  "  "  """"""""""  """#"""  """"  "  "  """"  """"""""""  #
 9 #  "        "  "  "  "        "     #     "  "  "  "     "  "           #  9
   #""""""  "  "  "  "  "  """"  """"""#  """"  "  "  "  "  "  "  """""""""#
10 #  "     "  "  "  "  "     "  "     #        "  "     "TP"  "  "        # 10
   #"""  """""""  "  "  "  "  "  """"  #     """"  """"""""""  "  "  """"  #
11 #  "  "        "  "  "  "TP"        +                    "     "     "  # 11
   #  "  "  """""""  "  "  #########################""""""  "     "  """"  #
12 #  "     "     "  "  "  #########################     "  "        "     # 12
   #  """""""  """"  "  "  #########################     "  """"""""""  "  #
13 #                 "  "  #########################     "        "  "  "  # 13
   #""""""  """"""""""  "  #########################     """""""  "  "  "  #
14 #        "           "E3+########################     "        "  "  "  # 14
   #  """""""  "  """""""""#########################  """"  """""""  "  """#
15 #  "        "           #########################                 "     # 15
   #++###################++#########################++###################++#
 0 #     "                 #############           #           "        "  #  0
   #"""  "  """""""  """"  #############           #"""""""""  "  """""""  #
 1 #  "  "           "     #############          5+  "           "        #  1
   #  "  "     """""""     #############           #  "  """"""""""  """"""#
 2 #  "  "           "     #############           #  "  "                 #  2
   #  "  """"""""""  "     #############           #  "  "  """"  """""""  #
 3 #     "        "  "     #############           #  "  "  "     "     "  #  3
   #  """"  "     "  """"""#########################  "  "  """""""  "  "  #
 4 #  "     "     "                    +        "TP"  "  "  "        "  "  #  4
   #  """"  "  "  """"""""""  """"     #  """"  "  "  "  "  "  """""""  """#
 5 #        "  "  "TP"     "  "        #     "  "     "  "  "  "  "     "  #  5
   #"""""""""  "  "  "  "  "  "  """"  #""""""  """"  "  "  "  "  "  """"""#
 6 #           "  "     "  "  "  "     #     "        "  "  "  "        "  #  6
   #  """"""""""  """"  "  "  """"  """#"""  """"""""""  "  "  """""""  "  #
 7 #  "           "     "  "        "  #              "  "                 +  7
   #  "  """"""""""  """"  "  """""""  #  """"  """"  "  "  """"""""""   E2+
 8 #  "  "              "  "  "        #     "     "  "  "     "           +  8
   #  "  "  """"""""""  "  """"  """"  #"""  """"  "  "  """"  "  """#######
 9 #  "     "           "  "     "  "  #  "     "  "  "     "  "     #     #  9
   #######"""  """""""  "  "  """"  "  #  """"  """"  """"  """""""  #     #
10 # 3  3+     "  "     "  "     "  "  #     "  "  "                 #     # 10
   #  ####"""""""""  """"  """"  "  "  #"""  "  "  """"""""""""""""  #     #
11 # 3  3+           "              "  +        "                    + 4   # 11
   #########################################################################
     4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15  0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11

ECL Script 5
KEY: # wall     + door/archway   TP Teleporter
     " hedge    E Entrance/exit

The Valjevo Castle hedge maze is the next layer of defense surrounding the
castle's inner tower.  Even the hedges can be deadly!

Hedges: You can step through a hedge ("), but every time you do so, a random
  character must make a successful saving throw vs. poison or take 201 damage.
  This doesn't count as poison damage for the Slow Poison or Neutralize Poison
  spells.

Random encounters: None, unless the alarm is active and you are not in
  locations 1, 2, or 5; the chance of a random encounter is then 1 in 21, or
  1 in 3 if you are in Search mode.

  The random encounters are with 4 GIANT SNAKE (#60) (Morale 100).  You can
  "F"lee, but "P"arleying will simply start combat.

Resting: It is always safe to rest in locations 1, 2, or 5.  It is safe to rest
  anywhere else as well, unless the alarm is active; then every 5 minutes rest
  has a 17% chance of being disturbed by a random encounter.

Differences from the tabletop adventure: The maps are almost identical; the
  monsters in the maze are somewhat stronger in the Gold Box version.

E1 - Exit to Valjevo Castle Northwest Quadrant.

E2 - Exit to Valjevo Castle Southeast Quadrant.

E3 - Entrance to Valjevo Castle Inner Tower.

TP - Teleporter to one of the other three teleporters, chosen at random.

1 - Quarters of Al-Hyam Dazid.  Al-Hyam is trying to learn how Tyranthraxus got
  his great power; Tyranthraxus is keeping him under watch and trying to learn
  all he can from him.  He is not interested in combat, and if you threaten
  him twice he will give the party all his notes (Journal Entry 30).  If you
  attack him, you face 1 AL-HYAM DAZID (#86) (Morale 50, 1423 XP); he carries
  Bracers AC 3, a Ring of Fire Resistance, and a Wand of Lightning (20
  charges).

2 - Trolls live in this tower.  If you do not "F"lee, you fight 8 TROLL (#31)
  (Morale 100, 1084 XP).

3 - This tower is guarded by 3 HILL GIANT (#55) (Morale 60, 1946 XP).  If you
  "P"arley with a "H"aughty or "A"busive attitude, and say that TYRANTHRAXUS
  sent you, they let you go.  Anything else results in combat ; the giants may
  ask for a non-existent password first.

4 - A group of giants is hiding here, avoiding work, and arguing.  If you stole
  anything from the altar of Bane at Valjevo Castle 11, or the alarm is active
  and you are not disguised, they attack immediately.  Otherwise, they'll ask
  you if frogs and toads are the same thing.  (For the record: toads are a
  proper subset of frogs, so the correct answer is no -- all toads are frogs,
  but not vice versa.)
  * If you either answer "Y"es or "A"ttack, you fight 4 FIRE GIANT (#56)
    (Morale 50, 5136 XP).
  * If you answer "N"o, you have another chance to "L"eave; "S"taying will
    result in a fight.

5 - Throne room of false Tyranthraxus.  The false Tyranthraxus confronts the
  party:
  * "C"ombat or "W"ait: fight 1 TYRANITHRAXUS [sic] (#92) and 2 6TH LVL THIEF
    (#93) (Morale 60, 1701 XP).  The false Tyranthraxus has Long Sword +5, Ring
    of Protection +3, and Gauntlets of Ogre Power.  You also claim his treasure
    of 1 jewelry and 8 gems.  This also sets of the alarm and causes you to
    loses any disguise.
  * "F"lee: works, but sets off the alarm.
  * "P"arley:
    * "H"aughty or "S"ly start combat as above, but cause no loss of disguise.
    * "N"ice and "M"eek result in the false Tyranthraxus asking you to leave.
      If you do, that sets off the alarm; if you stay, the effect is the same
      as "H"aughty or "S"ly
    * "A"busive: add together Party Strength and your spokesperson's Charisma
      modifier.  If this is 85 or more, acts as "H"aughty; otherwise, the false
      Tyranthraxus admits to being false and asks to be let go.  If you do, you
      can claim his treasure; otherwise acts as "H"aughty.  (That "more" should
      probably be "less".)

SECTION 6.24 - Valjevo Castle Inner Tower
-----------------------------------------

Lower Level                Upper Level                ECL Script 7

#########################  #########################  KEY: # wall
#           #           #  #        #   E3   #     #       ~ illusionary wall
#           ####        #  #        #  #\\#  #     #       + door/archway
#           #\\#        #  #    4   #  ####  #    2#       \ stairs
#           #\\#        #  ####++####  ####  ####++#       ~ Pool of Radiance
+E1         #E2#        #  #    3+    5####        #
#~~~~~#######~~####     #  #     #\\#############++#       E Entrance/exit
#     \\\\\\\  \\\\ 1   #  #     #\\##########     #
#########################  #######\\##########     #
                           #       6   #######     #
                           #           #######++####
                           #           ####        #
                           #  ~~~~     ####        #
                           #  ~~~~     ####        #
                           ################        #
                           ################        #
                           #########################

Tyranthraxus makes his lair here in the inner tower of Valjevo Castle.  Defeat
him and Phlan will be free!

Random encounters: None.

Resting: It is safe to rest anywhere.

Differences from the tabletop adventure: Tyranthraxus only has 2 level 8
  fighters defending him in the tabletop version, instead of the 12 here.  The
  possessed bronze dragon's name is Srossar; in the tabletop version, he only
  has 20% magic resistance, but has the standard repulsion breath and
  spellcasting abilities of an ancient bronze dragon, neither of which is
  present here.

E1 - Exit to Valjevo Castle Hedge Maze.

E2 - Stairs up to Upper Level.

E3 - Stairs down to Lower Level.

1 - Lair of a medusa; Tyranthraxus keeps the medusa here to trouble intruders
  who didn't find the secret door in the previous room.  You can "F"lee the
  medusa; "P"arley has the same result as "C"ombat: 1 MEDUSA (#49) (Morale 100,
  150 XP).  You can safely fight the medusa if everyone equips a Silver Mirror.
  You can also just skip it since it's worth little XP and has no treasure.

2 - This empty room has a trap door in it.  If you open it, and you have not
  killed the medusa at location 1, your character must save vs. petrification
  or be turned to stone.  You may then jump through the trap door; if you do,
  all characters take 3d6 damage, and you confront the medusa if it is still
  alive.

3 - A messenger that works for Genheeris and Tyranthraxus is here.  If you
  stole anything from the altar of Bane at Valjevo Castle 11, he immediately
  attacks you; fight 1 1ST LVL THIEF (#45) (Morale 100, 2 XP).  He will also
  attack if you "P"arley using an "A"busive attitude.  (I don't think
  messengers are usually this suicidal.)  If you "P"arley with any other
  attitude, he will be called into the inner office, emerge with papers, and
  leave.

4 - Genheeris's office.  If you killed the messenger at location 3, Genheeris
  will be frightened, and offer to deal with the party, even asking to join as
  an NPC: GENHEERIS (#88) (Morale 100).  Genheeris is not actually able to
  memorize spells once his currently memorized spells are expended (the game
  engine doesn't properly support his being level 7).  If you refuse this
  offer, he attacks you; you are awarded 756 XP and his Wand of Lightning (56
  charges) if you win.

  If you did not kill the messenger, "C"ombat or "P"arleying with a "H"aughty,
  "S"ly, or "A"busive attitude frightens Genheeris and leads to the above

  offer.  "N"ice or "M"eek results in Genheeris giving you an order; if you
  ignore it and "S"tay this will also frighten Genheeris.

5 - If Genheeris is in the party, he leaves the party here without notice.

6 - Lair of Tyranthraxus.  The ancient bronze dragon possessed by Tyranthraxus
  rests near the Pool of Radiance.  It asks two human guards to kill the party;
  if you do anything other than "F"lee, you fight 12 8TH LVL FIGHTER (#85)
  (Morale 100, 8390 XP); each fighter is using a Two-Handed Sword +2, Plate
  Mail +2, and a Ring of Protection +3.  (Where did those extra ten fighters
  come from?)

  If you defeat his guards, Tyranthraxus is intrigued by the party, and offers
  anyone that joins him leadership positions.  Everyone in the party then makes
  a decision.  Genheeris and all good and neutral NPCs always fight
  Tyranthraxus; all other evil NPCs always join Tyranthraxus.  If everyone
  joins Tyranthraxus, the game ends; otherwise, he attacks: fight 1
  TYRANITHRAXUS [sic] (#66) (Morale 100, 611 XP).

  If you win, Tyranthraxus's spirit departs from the bronze dragon's body, and
  the spirit threatens to possess one of the characters -- but Bane pulls
  Tyranthraxus into the pool before he can do so.  The party then returns to
  New Phlan victoriously.

  To win this series of battles more easily, use the Dust of Disappearance from
  the Temple of Bane.  It's not like there is anything better to save it for
  (no items survive transfer to Curse of the Azure Bonds).  It makes both
  battles much easier; you can move away from the fighters and they won't do
  anything if there is no character adjacent, and Tyranthraxus likewise cannot
  use his deadly electrical breath attack.  Other buffs long-lasting enough to
  cast before the first fight are Enlarge and Resist Fire.

  You can continue combat after defeating the fighters, to heal and cast buffs.
  If you didn't use the Dust of Disappearance, cast all the Mirror Image and
  Blink spells you have then.  One useful buff here is Protection from Good,
  because Tyranthraxus is actually lawful good (that's the alignment of the
  body he is possessing).


SECTION 7.1 - Mechanics Introduction
------------------------------------

The Gold Box games are fundamentally based on the three standard 1st Edition
AD&D rulebooks: the Player's Handbook, the Dungeon Master's Guide, and the
Monster Manual.  Some rules from Unearthed Arcana (mostly items) are applied,
as well as some monsters from Monster Manual II.  The major exception to this
is THAC0, which is a 2nd Edition rule; 2nd Edition came out not too long after
Pool of Radiance did.  3rd Edition did not exist until years after the last
Gold Box game was released.

The tabletop game uses dice of 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, and 20 sides.  The notation XdY
indicates the sum of rolling X Y-sided dice; a standard roll of two cubical
dice is represented as 2d6 and yields a number between 2 and 12.

The Gold Box games predate the invention of modern robust pseudorandom number
generators (the Mersenne Twister was not invented until 1997), so random
numbers in this game are not rigorously random.  As is typical for pseudorandom
number generators that old, you will often get clustering effects.  (Example:
if the game rolls d20 100 times, on average you will actually get 5 of each
number, but the 1s and 20s will tend to cluster together more than you would
expect statistically.  This effect is clearest when casting Fireball; you will
get both very low and very high damage rolls far more often than would happen
if the die rolls were truly random.)

Most of the rules here apply to all the Gold Box games, with known exceptions
indicated.  The major exception is spellcasting classes in the Dragonlance
games, which have their own rules.

SECTION 7.2 - Hit Points and Status Conditions
----------------------------------------------

Hit points should almost need no introduction.  A character is knocked
unconscious if reduced to 0 hit points or fewer.  Between -1 and -9 hit points,
1 hit point is lost every round, unless one of the following happens: another
character issues the "B"andage command (which has unlimited range), you cast
any cure spell on the character, or you win the combat.  Any of these will
bring the PC up to 0 hit points and stabilize the character.  At -10 or
fewer hit points, the PC dies.  Nothing else can harm such an unconscious
character.

(Being reduced below 0 hit points doesn't debilitate you as the tabletop game
does, nor does it outright kill you as in 2nd Edition or most classic CRPGs.
Also, the death from massive damage rule introduced in 2nd Edition does not
exist in 1st Edition or the Gold Box games.)

Fleeing a combat will result in the permanent loss of any disabled characters
left behind.

Death is much harder to fix than in most modern CRPGs; the standard Raise Dead
spell is not guaranteed to work (and is not supposed to work on full-blooded
elves, though it does here), and results in permanent Constitution loss even if
successful.  The higher-level Resurrection spell is not available at Pool of
Radiance temples.  If you are not above exploiting bugs, you can raise a Dead
character by casting Cause Light Wounds (which will not always work, as you
need to succeed on a touch attack roll) or Burning Hands (always works in this
game) in combat.

Animated results from casting Animate Dead on a Dead character.  Such a
character is under the control of the computer, and will only engage in
physical combat (no spells or items).  It can only be fixed with the Raise Dead
spell.  Animated characters count as undead and may be turned or destroyed by
enemy clerics.

Stoned (character turned into a statue) can be fixed with a Stone to Flesh
spell, which in this game you can only get at a temple (even though it's not
a clerical spell).

Gone means just that -- a Gone character is permanently dead and irrecoverable
(aside from restoring or editing a saved game).

Poison in AD&D 1st Edition does not work in the classic CRPG way of causing
gradual hit point loss.  It instead "kills" you if you fail your saving throw.
This form of death may be fixed with the Neutralize Poison spell, which in this
game may only be cast in temples.  The Slow Poison spell will temporarily work
to revive the character, and will work in the middle of combat, but at the end
of that spell's duration will cause the PC to die outright if you do not get
Neutralize Poison cast before that.

Blinded characters receive a -4 penalty to all of attack rolls, Armor Class,
and saving throws.  (They do not treat all enemies as invisible, as they do
in the tabletop game.)

Disease will drain 1 hit point every 10 minutes (this will not cause hit points
to drop below 1), as well as 1 Strength every hour (this will not cause
Strength to drop below 3, but is permanent).  Disease will also prevent proper
hit point restoration.  This can be cured by the Cure Disease spell, Keoghtum's
Ointment, or (in later games) a paladin's power.

Charmed is a condition caused by a variety of spells (Charm Person, Snake
Charm) or some monster special attacks.  A charmed creature will fight for the
other side while charmed, though it cannot be controlled.  A physical attack by
a charmed creature's ally targeted on another ally automatically breaks the
charm.  (Magical attacks do not have this effect.)  The manual says that you
can keep charmed enemies after combat, but this is not true -- they will
instead disappear together with whatever treasure they were carrying.  Aside
from a physical attack, this can be fixed with another charm spell (though you
will still be unable to actually control the character), or Dispel Magic.

Helplessness is caused in combat by a variety of spells (Sleep, Stinking Cloud,
Hold Person) or some monster special attacks.  Any physical attack on a
helpless defender automatically hits and does enough damage for the defender to
start dying.  (This is only supposed to happen under 1st Edition rules; in 2nd
Edition and later, extra conditions apply if you want to automatically slay a
helpless defender.)

SECTION 7.3 - Time
------------------

The smallest unit of time the game keeps track of is the minute.

There are 10 minutes in 1 turn; ("minute" and "round" are synonymous)
             6 turns in 1 hour; (yes, "round" and "turn" are not the same)
            24 hours in 1 day;
             10 days in 1 tenday; (a "week" of 7 days exists in the base rules)
           3 tendays in 1 month;
           12 months in 1 year.

The standard Forgotten Realms calendar adds extra days to bring the year to 365
or 366 days (and is always a pure solar calendar like the modern Gregorian
calendar), though it doesn't happen here.  The Gold Box games mostly do not
use or track tendays.

Units of time longer than a day have very little influence on gameplay.   You
need to gain about 20 years before aging starts to become a problem at all, yet
as far as I can tell, you do not actually age by means other than by casting
Haste.  In later games you can find and even buy Elixirs of Youth to reduce
your age anyway.

The sun rises at 00:00 and sets at 14:00; this always applies, as the Gold Box
games have an eternal equinox.  It usually does not matter whether it is day
or night; the major exception is that the shops and city hall in New Phlan are
only open during the day.

It takes 1 minute to move forward one square in the first-person view, and 10
minutes to thoroughly search the current square.  Moving in the overland view
takes 12 hours per square.

In the Gold Box games, there is rarely urgency to hurry, even if you are
pursuing bad guys; urgency is usually implemented by making it difficult or
impossible to rest.  The main exception in this game is that the Valhingen
Graveyard mission will get harder as time passes; even then, you are better off
becoming as powerful as you can before undertaking it.

Combat is divided into rounds; 1 round is 1 minute (this is different from 3rd
Edition and later).  A round is divided into segments which last roughly
several seconds each.

If you remove a character from your party, any temporary effects are remembered
and frozen in time.

The Gold Box game takes place early in 1358 DR (typical for 1st Edition
Forgotten Realms tabletop gaming); the Adventurer's Journal references the
Flight of the Dragons happening in the Year of the Worm (1356 DR) two years
ago.  The tabletop version explicitly takes place in 1357 DR, in the months of
Mirtul (May) and Kythorn (June), four months before the tabletop Curse of the
Azure Bonds.

In 2nd Edition and later, Pool of Radiance is retconned to take place in 1340
DR, and what happens is the novel.  Pools of Darkness, the last of the game
series (second of the novel series), then takes place in 1350 DR.  The Gold Box
games take place in an alternate timeline, and anything happening in 1358 DR
and later that happens in 2nd Edition or later sources generally can't happen.
Many events revolve around the Time of Troubles, which shakes up godly power
and can't happen in the Gold Box timeline.

SECTION 7.4 - Experience and Gaining Levels
-------------------------------------------

AD&D popularized the very concept of gaining experience (XP) and gaining
discrete power-ups at levels of experience.  The amount of experience needed to
gain a level is listed under the section for each individual class.

Characters must be conscious at the end of a battle to receive experience; just
having positive hit points is not sufficient.  Any sleep or paralysis is
automatically fixed before this, which doesn't necessarily happen even in other
AD&D computer adaptations.  Single-classed characters with at least 16 in all
primary statistics receive a 10% bonus to experience earned.

Treasure can be worth experience too.  Experience for magical items varies by
item.  The standard rule of thumb in the tabletop game is that experience
value is 20% of the gold value of the item.  Any magical item with a plus is
worth 400 XP per plus.

(This seems strange, as treasure these days is almost always treated as its own
reward, but in the days before 1st Edition AD&D, treasure was the primary way
to get experience.  That meant that you would find gold for no other reason
than to get experience, which in turn led to the problem of having gold and
nothing to spend it on.  Yes, that problem predates the home computer.)

You do not gain experience for a monster or anything it carries if its name is
blue (i.e., monster is charmed) at the time it is killed.

Unlike most modern games, gaining a level is not automatic.  You must go to a
class-specific training hall to do so (this is only possible in New Phlan), and
pay 1000 gold (200 platinum).

You cannot gain more than one level in one class at a time.  If you have enough
experience to go up more than one level in one class, doing so will cause you
to lose just enough experience so that you are 1 experience point short of
another level; this will not cause you to lose already earned levels in a
different class.  The traditional Gold Box way to get that next experience
point is to get into a tavern brawl.

If you are a multi-classed character (only non-humans may multi-class, and in
fact there's not much point in playing a non-human if you do not), experience
is evenly divided between your classes.  (This is always rounded down, which
is not the case in the tabletop game.)  This will mean you will progress in
your classes at different rates.  This division happens even if you have
reached the maximum level for one of your classes.

When gaining a level as a multi-classed character, the normal rules from the
tabletop game or later Gold Box games for gaining maximum hit points do not
apply.  Instead, follow the following steps:
  (1) roll die for hit points
  (2) divide by number of classes, rounding down
  (3) if below 1, set to 1
  (4) add Constitution modifier (maximum of +2 if below Constitution 20, even
      if the level gained is fighter).
For levels beyond where you roll a die, you instead gain a fixed specific
number of hit points if single-classed, or 1 if multi-classed.

Dual-classing, which only humans can do, is not implemented in Pool of
Radiance.  It is in later games, so you can plan for it.  You must have at
least 15 in the primary statistics of your original class, and at least 17 in
the primary statistics of your destination class.  You may not use most
abilities of the old class, other than hit points, until your new class's level
is higher.  You may then use all the abilities of the old class freely, except
for the ability to wear armor if you want to cast magic-user spells (this does
not apply if you were a ranger of 9th level or higher) or if you want to use
thief abilities.  Tabletop game rules permit you to change classes more than
once so long as you never return to a previous class, but you may only ever do
so once per character in the Gold Box games.

Non-humans have a racial limit to how many levels they can gain in most
classes, which often depend on the class's primary statistic.  This was one of
the most hated rules of 1st and 2nd Edition before it was dropped in 3rd
Edition.  Thieves and humans have no such restrictions.  This is in addition to
the limits imposed by Pool of Radiance itself; these game level limits are
extended as you move on to the sequels, but racial level limits never are.

Some undead have a level-draining attack -- one of the most feared attacks in
1st and 2nd Edition.  If such an attack hits, the affected character will lose
a level and the corresponding experience; multi-classed characters lose the
most recently gained level.  The Restoration spell (normally 7th level, but you
can find quite a few scrolls with it as treasure) will mostly fix this, but
will only restore just enough experience to restore the lost level.

SECTION 7.5.1 - Statistic: Strength
-----------------------------------

          +To  +To  Carry   Open Doors  Bend  Monster with
   Score  Hit  Dam  Capac   Easy  Hard  Bars  this strength
       3   -3   -1    162    1/6     -    0%
     4-5   -2   -1    262    1/6     -    0%
     6-7   -1    0    362    1/6     -    0%
     8-9    0    0    512    2/6     -    1%
   10-11    0    0    512    2/6     -    2%
   12-13    0    0    612    2/6     -    4%
   14-15    0    0    712    2/6     -    7%
      16    0   +1    862    3/6     -   10%
      17   +1   +1   1012    3/6     -   13%
      18   +1   +2   1262    3/6     -   16%
18/01-50   +1   +3   1512    3/6     -   20%
18/51-75   +2   +3   1762    4/6     -   25%
18/76-90   +2   +4   2012    4/6     -   30%
18/91-99   +2   +5   2512    4/6   1/6   35%
   18/00   +3   +6   3512    5/6   2/6   40%  Ogre
      19   +3   +7   4512    7/8   3/6   50%  Hill giant
      20   +3   +8   5012    7/8   3/6   60%  Stone giant
      21   +4   +9   6012   9/10   4/6   70%  Frost giant
      22   +4  +10   7512  11/12   4/6   80%  Fire giant
      23   +5  +11   9012  11/12   5/6   90%  Cloud giant
      24   +6  +12  12012  19/20   7/8  100%  Storm giant
      25   +7  +14  15012  23/24  9/10  100%  Titan

"+To-hit" only affects melee attacks, not missile attacks.
"+To-dam" affects melee weapon damage; penalties cannot cause damage to drop
  below 1 unless you cannot cause damage to begin with.  It does not affect
  thrown weapons (this does happen in 2nd Edition), and it also does not affect
  missiles fired from a launcher unless you are firing from a Fine Composite
  Long Bow.
"Carry capac" measures unencumbered carrying capacity; you can actually carry
  up to 988 extra coins of weight beyond the limit without magical assistance.
"Open doors" is the standard probability for opening a stuck or heavy door in
  one try.  If you try to "B"ash open a door, this chance of success is
  checked for every character, depending on the door difficulty.
"Bend Bars"/Lift Gates is the percentage chance of a feat of strength, the
  standard ones being bending iron bars or lifting an iron portcullis.

Strength is the primary statistic for fighters; a single-classed fighter with
  Strength 16 or more receives a 10% bonus to experience earned.  Strength is
  also a primary statistic for paladins and rangers in later games.
A fighter with 18 Strength also gets to roll percentile dice for exceptional
  Strength; non-warriors do not get this roll.
The tabletop class minimums for Strength are not enforced except when you first
  roll a charcter.

SECTION 7.5.2 - Statistic: Intelligence
---------------------------------------

This is only of any importance at all for classes that can cast magic-user
spells.

There are minimum Intelligence requirements for casting 5th and higher level
magic-user spells (which won't be an issue at all until later in Curse of the
Azure Bonds).

Intelligence is the primary statistic for magic-users; a single-classed magic-
user with Intelligence 16 or more receives a 10% bonus to experience earned.
Intelligence is also a primary statistic for rangers in later games.

Number of languages you can learn is never relevant; the chance to learn a
spell is 100% if it can be learned at all; and there are no minimum or
maximum numbers of spells you can learn per level.  (Intelligence affects all
of these in the tabletop game.)

Intelligence also does not grant you bonus spells, as it does in later AD&D
editions.  At low levels, a magic-user is going to run out of spells quickly.
Not for nothing is a level 1 magic-user nicknamed "Sleep spell on legs".
The tabletop class minimums for Intelligence are not enforced except when you
first roll a character.

SECTION 7.5.3 - Statistic: Wisdom
---------------------------------

       S. T.  Cleric
Score  Bonus  Spells
    3     -3
    4     -2
  5-7     -1
 8-12      0
   13      0  Bonus L1 spell
   14      0  Bonus L1 spell
   15     +1  Bonus L2 spell
   16     +2  Bonus L2 spell
   17     +3  Bonus L3 spell; minimum needed for 6th level cleric spells
   18     +4  Bonus L4 spell; minimum needed for 7th level cleric spells

The saving throw bonus applies against any spell that tests willpower: charm,
fear, and illusion (but not other spell types that permit a Will saving throw
in 3rd Edition and later).

Wisdom is the primary statistic for clerics; a single-classed cleric with
Wisdom 16 or more receives a 10% bonus to experience earned.  Wisdom is also a
primary statistic for both paladins and rangers in later games.

The tabletop game rules for a chance of spell failure below Wisdom 13 are not
enforced, and the minimums for Wisdom are not enforced except when you first
roll a character.  Wisdom above 18 also will not grant additional spells as
described in Deities & Demigods.

SECTION 7.5.4 - Statistic: Dexterity
------------------------------------

                     ---- Thief Skill Adjustments -----
                                   Find/
       React   Def.    Pick  Open Remove   Move Hide in
Score  /Miss   Adj.  Pocket Locks  Traps Silent Shadows
    3     -3     +4     N/A   N/A    N/A    N/A     N/A
    4     -2     +3     N/A   N/A    N/A    N/A     N/A
    5     -1     +2     N/A   N/A    N/A    N/A     N/A
    6      0     +1     N/A   N/A    N/A    N/A     N/A
  7-8      0      0     N/A   N/A    N/A    N/A     N/A
    9      0      0    -15%  -10%   -10%   -20%    -10%
   10      0      0   -10%*   -5%   -10%   -15%     -5%
   11      0      0     -5%     0    -5%   -10%       0
   12      0      0       0     0      0    -5%       0
   13      0      0       0     0      0      0       0
   14      0      0       0     0      0      0       0
   15      0     -1       0     0      0      0       0
   16     +1     -2       0  +5%*      0      0       0
   17     +2     -3     +5%  +10%      0    +5%     +5%
   18     +3     -4    +10%  +15%    +5%   +10%    +10%
   19     +3     -4    +15%  +20%   +10%   +12%    +12%
   20     +3     -4   +20%* +25%*  +15%*  +15%*   +15%*
   21     +4     -5   +25%* +30%*  +20%*  +18%*   +18%*
   22     +4     -5   +30%* +35%*  +25%*  +20%*   +20%*
   23     +4     -5   +35%* +40%*  +30%*  +23%*   +23%*
   24     +5     -6   +40%* +45%*  +35%*  +25%*   +25%*
   25     +5     -6   +45%* +50%*  +40%*  +30%*   +30%*

"React/Miss" is both the to-hit bonus for thrown and launched missile weapons,
  and the subtracted modifier to initiative.
"Def. Adj." is the modifier to AC (the lower, the better).
"Pick Pocket", "Open Locks", "Find/Remove Traps", "Move Silent", and "Hide in
  Shadows are the percentage adjustments to thief abilities:
  * These are only first applied starting at level 2.
  * If for whatever reason you adjust a Thief below Dexterity 9, the penalties
    for low Dexterity disappear.
  * The Dexterity 10 adjustment for Pick Picket is actually -19%.
  * The Dexterity 16 adjustment for Open Locks is actually -5%.
  * The game does not support Dexterity 20+ for these; the values given above
    are what are supposed to happen.  (You actually get apparently random
    modifiers.)

Dexterity is the primary statistic for thieves; a single-classed thief with
Dexterity 16 or more receives a 10% bonus to experience earned.

The tabletop class minimums for Dexterity are not enforced except when you
first roll a character.

There is no non-cheating way I am aware of to actually obtain Dexterity 21+ in
any of the Gold Box games.

SECTION 7.5.5 - Statistic: Constitution
---------------------------------------

         HP/  System  Res.  S. T.   Pois
Score  Level   Shock  Odds  Bonus  Bonus  Regen
    3     -2     35%   40%      0      0      0
    4     -1     40%   45%     +1      0      0
    5     -1     45%   50%     +1      0      0
    6     -1     50%   55%     +1      0      0
    7      0     55%   60%     +2      0      0
    8      0     60%   65%     +2      0      0
    9      0     65%   70%     +2      0      0
   10      0     70%   75%     +2      0      0
   11      0     75%   80%     +3      0      0
   12      0     80%   85%     +3      0      0
   13      0     85%   90%     +3      0      0
   14      0     88%   92%     +4      0      0
   15     +1     91%   94%     +4      0      0
   16     +2     95%   96%     +4      0      0
   17     +3     97%   98%     +4      0      0
   18     +4     99%  100%     +5      0      0
   19    +5*     99%  100%     +5     +1      0
   20    +5*     99%  100%     +5     +1   1/60
   21    +6*     99%  100%     +6     +2   2/60
   22    +6*     99%  100%     +6     +2   3/60
   23    +6*     99%  100%     +6     +3   4/60
   24    +7*     99%  100%     +6     +3   5/60
   25    +7*    100%  100%     +7     +4   6/60
* This is buggy, see below.

"HP/Level" is the adjustment to hit points upon character creation, and for
  every level advancement, if there is a die roll involved.  A penalty cannot
  decrease hit points gained below 1; anyone other than a fighter, paladin, or
  ranger is not supposed to get a bonus of more than +2.  The game doesn't
  handle hit point bonuses for Constitution 19 or more gracefully, even though
  you can start with Constitution 19 at character creation.  Things are
  especially buggy at 23+; with Constitution 22, which is the highest
  well-behaved score, a single-classed fighter gets a +7 bonus per level, and
  everyone else gets a +5 bonus per level (neither of which is supposed to
  happen).
"System Shock" is the percent chance of surviving any change in form.  In the
  Gold Box games, this only applies to surviving the Stone to Flesh spell,
  and not in Pool of Radiance; it is only implemented in Secret of the Silver
  Blades.  (It doesn't apply to any form of unnatural aging, as it does in
  tabletop rules.)
"Res. Odds" is the percent chance that a Raise Dead or Resurrection spell will
  actually work.  If this fails, the character is forever dead.
"S. T. Bonus" is the saving throw bonus that a dwarf, gnome, or halfling
  receives against rod/staff/wand or spells.  It also applies to a dwarf or
  halfling saving against poison.
"Pois Bonus" is the saving throw bonus that a human, half-elf, elf, or gnome
  receives against poison (dwarves and halflings have a higher bonus already).
"Regen" permits a character with very high Constitution to restore hit points
  much faster than normal, regenerating the indicated number of hit points in
  the indicated number of minutes.  (In the tabletop game, Constitution 21+
  instead reduces the time to regenerate 1 hit point by 10 minutes per
  extra point of Constitution above 20.)

There is no limit to the number of times you may cast Raise Dead or
Resurrection on a character (in tabletop rules the limit is once per
Constitution point).

SECTION 7.5.6 - Statistic: Charisma
-----------------------------------

This gets checked in interactions with NPCs, especially when parleying,
depending your spokesperson's (currently selected character) Charisma:

         Reaction
Score  Adjustment
    3           0   In the tabletop rules, this is expressed as a percentage
    4           5   equal to the number from this table minus 25.
    5          10   
    6          15   Charisma over 18 can be achieved with the Friends spell,
    7          20   but anything better than 18 has no effect.  (If Pool of
 8-12          25   Radiance were to use Deities & Demigods, every point above
   13          30   18 would add another 5%.  Charisma over 18 also does have
   14          35   an effect in all Gold Box games it is checked for outside
   15          40   of Pool of Radiance.  It is never checked for in Curse of
   16          50   the Azure Bonds.)
   17          55   
   18          60

Loyalty is never checked for, and henchmen don't exist, as those tabletop game
effects aren't implemented.

SECTION 7.6.1 - Race: Human
---------------------------

Humans have a Strength range of 3-18(00) if male, and 3-18(50) if female.
All other statistics have a beginning range of 3-18.

Only humans are capable of dual-classing, which is not implemented in Pool of
Radiance, but is in all its sequels.  They are the only player race not capable
of multi-classing.  (This all predates the 3rd Edition system, where everyone
can multi-class and dual-classing is done away with.)

Humans have no racial level limits in any class and may choose any available
class.

Humans are also the strongest of the races in this game; even the unimplemented
half-orcs cannot exceed 18/99 Strength in the 1st Edition tabletop game.  (This
sounds a little unusual to contemporary ears, but early editions of AD&D more
or less take this straight from Tolkien.)

Since humans have no level limits in any class, if you play the later Gold Box
games they should eventually should become vast majority of your party by about
halfway through Secret of the Silver Blades at the latest (and earlier if you
follow my suggestions).

SECTION 7.6.2 - Race: Dwarf
---------------------------

Dwarves have a Strength range of 8-18(99) if male, and 8-17 if female.  Other
statistics begin at: Intelligence 3-18; Wisdom 3-18; Dexterity 3-17;
Constitution 12-19; Charisma 3-16.

Dwarves get +1 to Constitution and -1 to Charisma on their original rolls.

A dwarf may be a fighter, thief, or a multi-class fighter/thief.  (Only a NPC
dwarf may be a cleric.)

Dwarves have a maximum fighter level of 9.

A dwarf gets a bonus to saving throws against rod/staff/wand, spells, and
poison, equal to +1 per 3.5 points of Constitution, rounded down.

A dwarf gets a +1 bonus to hit when melee attacking a half-orc, goblin,
hobgoblin, or orc.

A dwarf gets a -4 bonus to Armor Class when being melee attacked by an ogre,
troll, ogre mage, giant, or titan.

A dwarf thief gets a +10% bonus to Open Lock rolls, a +15% bonus to Find/Remove
Traps rolls, a -10% penalty to Climb Walls rolls, and a -5% penalty to Read
Languages rolls.  The positive modifiers are offset by the inability of a dwarf
to start with more than Dexterity 17.

Dwarves can sometimes determine things about mines, stonework, and anything
underground on an ad hoc basis.  (This often has defined probabilities in the
tabletop game.)

(A dwarf in the tabletop game also has infravision with 60-foot range and
additional languages.  Adult dwarf women do grow beards, but usually keep them
shaved in 1st Edition Forgotten Realms.  It's also implied in the base
rulebooks that a dwarf woman shaving her beard is kind of like wearing a short
skirt in real life.  Ed Greenwood is involved, what did you expect?)

SECTION 7.6.3 - Race: Elf
-------------------------

Elves have a Strength range of 3-18(75) if male, and 3-16 if female.  Other
statistics begin at: Intelligence 8-18; Wisdom 3-18; Dexterity 7-19;
Constitution 6-18; Charisma 8-18.

Elves get +1 to Dexterity and -1 to Constitution on their original rolls.  The
latter does not stop you from modifying their Constitution to 18.

An elf may be a fighter, magic-user, or thief, and may also multi-class in any
combination of those three classes.  (Only a NPC elf may be a cleric.)

Elves have a maximum fighter level of 7, and a maximum magic-user level of 11.

An elf has 90% magic resistance against sleep and charm spells.  Like a regular
magic resistance roll, even if this fails, the elf is still entitled to a
saving throw.  Elves are also immune to the paralysis attack of ghouls.  On the
other hand, the Raise Dead spell is not supposed work on them either (though it
does in Pool of Radiance).

An elf gets a +1 bonus to hit when attacking with either a short or long sword,
or with any bow (even a crossbow, which is not the case in the tabletop game).

A multi-classed elf is permitted to cast magic-user spells in any armor.

An elf thief has a +5% bonus to Pick Pocket, Move Silently, and Hear Noise
rolls; a +10% bonus to Hide in Shadows rolls; and a -5% penalty to Open Lock
rolls.  (These bonuses are actually better than they appear, because an elf can
start with Dexterity 19.)

An elf has the ability to readily detect secret doors on an ad hoc basis.  This
often uses the defined probabilities from the tabletop game: 1 in 3 if actively
searching, 1 in 6 even if not.

An elf in the tabletop game also has infravision with 60-foot range, additional
languages, and the ability to surprise enemies if lightly armored.

SECTION 7.6.4 - Race: Gnome
---------------------------

Gnomes have a Strength range of 6-18(50) if male, and 6-15 if female.  Other
statistics begin at: Intelligence 7-18; Wisdom 3-18; Dexterity 3-18;
Constitution 8-18; Charisma 3-18.

A gnome may be a fighter, thief, or a multi-class fighter/thief.  (A NPC gnome
is allowed to be a cleric.  A gnome in the tabletop game may also be an
illusionist, a class never implemented in the Gold Box games.)

Gnomes have a maximum fighter level of 6.

A gnome gets a bonus to saving throws against rod/staff/wand and spells, equal
to +1 per 3.5 points of Constitution, rounded down.

A gnome gets a +1 bonus to hit when attacking a kobold or goblin.

A gnome gets a +4 bonus to Armor Class when being melee attacked by a gnoll,
bugbear, ogre, troll, ogre mage, giant, or titan.

A gnome in the tabletop game also has infravision with 60-foot range,
additional languages, and the ability to determine things about mines and
underground passages.

A gnome thief gets a +5% bonus to Open Lock, Move Silently, and Hide in
Shadows rolls; a +10% bonus to Find/Remove Traps and Hear Noise rolls; and a
-15% penalty to Climb Walls rolls.

Without the ability to become an illusionist, and their low level limits,
gnomes aren't a useful race in the Gold Box adaptations.

SECTION 7.6.5 - Race: Half-Elf
------------------------------

Half-elves have a Strength range of 3-18(90) if male, and 3-17 if female.
Other statistics begin at: Intelligence 4-18; Wisdom 3-18; Dexterity 6-18;
Constitution 6-18; Charisma 3-18.

A half-elf may be a cleric, fighter, magic-user, or thief; or a multi-class
cleric/fighter, cleric/magic-user, fighter/magic-user, fighter/thief,
magic-user/thief, cleric/fighter/magic-user, or fighter/magic-user/thief.  (In
later games, they may also be rangers or multi-class cleric/rangers.)

Half-elves have a maximum cleric level of 5, and maximum fighter, ranger, and
magic-user levels of 8.

A half-elf has 30% magic resistance against sleep and charm spells.  Like a
regular magic resistance roll, even if this fails, the half-elf can still get a
regular saving throw.

A multi-class half-elf is permitted to cast magic-user spells in any armor.

A half-elf gets a +5% bonus to Hide in Shadows rolls, and a +10% bonus to
Pick Pockets rolls.

A half-elf has the ability to readily detect secret doors on an ad hoc basis.
This often uses the defined probabilities from the tabletop game: 1 in 3 if
actively searching, 1 in 6 even if not.

A half-elf in the tabletop game also has infravision with 60-foot range and
additional languages.

Half-elves make good multi-classed characters in Pool of Radiance, but their
strict level limits render them rapidly obsolete even early in Curse of the
Azure Bonds.

SECTION 7.6.6 - Race: Halfling
------------------------------

Halflings have a Strength range of 6-17 if male, and 6-14 if female.  Other
statistics begin at: Intelligence 6-18; Wisdom 3-17; Dexterity 8-18;
Constitution 10-18; Charisma 3-18.

Halflings get -1 to Strength and +1 to Dexterity on their original rolls.

A halfling may be a fighter, thief, or a multi-class fighter/thief.

Halflings have a maximum fighter level of 5.

A halfling gets a bonus to saving throws against rod/staff/wand, spells, and
poison, equal to +1 per 3.5 points of Constitution, rounded down.

A halfling thief gets a +5% bonus to Pick Pockets, Open Lock, Find/Remove
Traps, and Hear Noise rolls; a +10% bonus to Move Silently rolls; a +15% bonus
to Hide in Shadows rolls; a -15% penalty to Climb Walls rolls; and a -5%
penalty to Read Languages rolls.

The enhanced thieving abilities of halflings are trivially relevant at best, so
with their low Strength and level limit in fighter, there is little reason to
create a halfling in the Gold Box games.

(A halfling in the tabletop game also has additional languages and the ability
to surprise enemies if lightly armored, and may also have infravision or the
ability to determine things about mines and underground passages.  Halflings
in the tabletop game are also divided into three sub-races that do not exist in
the Forgotten Realms.)

SECTION 7.7.1 - Class: Cleric
-----------------------------

                  - Spells by Spell Level -
Level       Exp.  1   2   3   4   5   6   7
    1          0  1   -   -   -   -   -   -
    2      1,501  2   -   -   -   -   -   -
    3      3,001  2   1   -   -   -   -   -
    4      6,001  3   2   -   -   -   -   -
    5     13,001  3   3   1   -   -   -   -
    6     27,501  3   3   2   -   -   -   - (level cap for this game)
    7     55,001  3   3   2   1   -   -   -
    8    110,001  3   3   3   2   -   -   -
    9    225,001  4   4   3   2   1   -   -
   10    450,001  4   4   3   3   2   -   -
   11    675,001  5   4   4   3   2   1   -
   12    900,001  6   5   5   3   2   2   -
   13  1,125,001  6   6   6   4   2   2   -
   14  1,350,001  6   6   6   5   3   2   -
   15  1,575,001  7   7   7   5   4   2   -
   16  1,800,001  7   7   7   6   5   3   1
   17  2,025,001  8   8   8   6   5   3   1
   18  2,250,001  8   8   8   7   6   4   1
   19  2,475,001  9   9   9   7   6   4   2
   20  2,700,001  9   9   9   8   7   5   2
   21  2,925,001  9   9   9   9   8   6   2
   22  3,150,001  9   9   9   9   9   6   3
   23  3,375,001  9   9   9   9   9   7   3
   24  3,600,001  9   9   9   9   9   8   3
   25  3,825,001  9   9   9   9   9   8   4
   26  4,050,001  9   9   9   9   9   9   4
   27  4,275,001  9   9   9   9   9   9   5
   28  4,500,001  9   9   9   9   9   9   6
  29+ 4,725,001+  9   9   9   9   9   9   7

Only humans or half-elves may be PC clerics.  They may be of any alignment
(though the tabletop game does not permit true neutral).

Clerics gain 1d8 hit points per level until level 9, modified by Constitution,
then exactly 2 hit points per level thereafter.

After reaching 9th level, each further cleric level requires 225,000 additional
experience.

Clerics have a maximum level of 6 in Pool of Radiance and Gateway to the Savage
Frontier; 10 in Curse of the Azure Bonds and Treasures of the Savage Frontier;
15 in Secret of the Silver Blades; and 40 in Pools of Darkness.

Half-elf clerics may not exceed level 5; even when triple-classed, they will
likely hit this limit long before the end of the game.  (The Gold Box games do
not implement the Unearthed Arcana rules where Wisdom 16 or more increases this
limit.)

The prime statistic of a cleric is Wisdom.  A cleric has a minimum requirement
of Wisdom 9, though you can "M"odify a character to start with less.  Single-
classed Clerics with Wisdom 16 or higher receive a 10% bonus to experience
earned.

A cleric is only capable of wielding a club, flail, hammer, mace, or staff, but
may wear any armor or shield.  (Staff slings do not exist in this game; they do
in later Gold Box games.)

Clerics automatically are capable of learning and casting all spells of a given
spell level as soon as the minimum required experience level is reached.

Wisdom affects casting clerical spells as follows:
(1) There are bonus spells for a Wisdom of at least 13 (see Wisdom table).
    These apply only if you are able to actually cast spells of that level.
(2) A Wisdom of 17 is required to cast 6th-level spells.  A Wisdom of 18 is
    required to cast 7th-level spells.

Clerics are capable of turning undead (see that section for details).  A PC
cleric always can turn undead, even if evil.

A cleric in the tabletop game can also attract followers at 8th level, and may
construct a religious stronghold at 9th level.  Pool of Radiance also does not
enforce the minimum other statistics that other Gold Box games and the tabletop
game do.

SECTION 7.7.2 - Class: Fighter
------------------------------

Level      Exp.
    1         0
    2     2,001
    3     4,001
    4     8,001
    5    18,001
    6    35,001
    7    70,001 two melee attacks (every other round)
    8   125,001 (level cap for this game)
   9+  250,001+

A fighter may be of any race and of any alignment.

Fighter is one of the classes that counts as a "warrior".  (This is the 2nd
Edition definition, which is more consistent than in 1st Edition, so I'll use
that.)  The knights, paladins, and rangers of other Gold Box games are also
warriors.

Fighters gain 1d10 hit points per level until level 9, modified by
Constitution, then exactly 3 hit points per level thereafter.

After reaching 9th level, each further fighter level requires 250,000
additional experience.

Fighters have a maximum level of 8 in Pool of Radiance and Gateway to the
Savage Frontier; 12 in Curse of the Azure Bonds and Treasures of the Savage
Frontier; 15 in Secret of the Silver Blades; and 40 in Pools of Darkness.

Non-human fighters have the following additional level limits:
  Dwarf: 7th if Strength 16 or less; 8th if Strength 17; 9th if Strength 18.
  Elf: 5th if Strength 16 or less; 6th if Strength 17; 7th if Strength 18.
  Gnome: 5th if Strength 17 or less; 6th if Strength 18.
  Half-Elf: 6th if Strength 16 or less; 7th if Strength 17; 8th if Strength 18.
  Halfling: 4th if Strength 16 or less; 5th if Strength 17.
(Unearthed Arcana has rules for extending these level limits with especially
high statistics, but the Gold Box games do not use them.)

The prime statistic of a fighter is Strength.  A fighter has a minimum
requirement of Strength 9, though you can "M"odify a character to start with
less.  Single-classed fighters with Strength 16 or higher receive a 10% bonus
to experience earned.

A fighter may wield any weapon and wear any armor or shield.

A fighter may get two melee attacks per round at higher levels: every other
combat round starting at 7th level, and all rounds starting at 13th level.

Fighters of at least level 2 may also attack multiple adjacent weak enemies
(those with 0 hit dice) in a single round, up to one weak enemy per level.

A fighter in the tabletop game may build a stronghold and attract followers
starting at 9th level.  Pool of Radiance also does not enforce the minimum
other statistics that other Gold Box games and the tabletop game do.

SECTION 7.7.3 - Class: Magic-User
---------------------------------

                  ----- Spells by Spell Level -----
Level       Exp.  1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9
    1          0  1   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -
    2      2,501  2   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -
    3      5,001  2   1   -   -   -   -   -   -   -
    4     10,001  3   2   -   -   -   -   -   -   -
    5     22,501  4   2   1   -   -   -   -   -   -
    6     40,001  4   2   2   -   -   -   -   -   - (level cap for this game)
    7     60,001  4   3   2   1   -   -   -   -   -
    8     90,001  4   3   3   2   -   -   -   -   -
    9    135,001  4   3   3   2   1   -   -   -   -
   10    250,001  4   4   3   2   2   -   -   -   -
   11    375,001  4   4   4   3   3   -   -   -   -
   12    750,001  4   4   4   4   4   1   -   -   -
   13  1,125,001  5   5   5   4   4   2   -   -   -
   14  1,500,001  5   5   5   4   4   2   1   -   -
   15  1,875,001  5   5   5   5   5   2   1   -   -
   16  2,250,001  5   5   5   5   5   3   2   1   -
   17  2,625,001  5   5   5   5   5   3   3   2   -
   18  3,000,001  5   5   5   5   5   3   3   2   1
   19  3,375,001  5   5   5   5   5   3   3   3   1
   20  3,750,001  5   5   5   5   5   4   3   3   2
   21  4,125,001  5   5   5   5   5   4   4   4   2
   22  4,500,001  5   5   5   5   5   5   4   4   3
   23  4,875,001  5   5   5   5   5   5   5   5   3
   24  5,250,001  5   5   5   5   5   5   5   5   4
   25  5,625,001  5   5   5   5   5   5   5   5   5
   26  6,000,001  6   6   6   6   5   5   5   5   5
   27  6,375,001  6   6   6   6   6   6   6   5   5
   28  6,750,001  6   6   6   6   6   6   6   6   6
  29+ 7,125,001+  7   7   7   7   6   6   6   6   6

Only humans, elves, and half-elves may be magic-users, though they may be of
any alignment.  They begin the game knowing Detect Magic, Read Magic, Shield,
and Sleep.

Magic-users gain 1d4 hit points per level until level 11, modified by
Constitution, then exactly 1 hit point per level thereafter.

After reaching 11th level, each further magic-user level requires 375,000
additional experience.

Magic-users have a maximum level of 6 in Pool of Radiance and Gateway to the
Savage Frontier; 11 in Curse of the Azure Bonds and Treasure of the Savage
Frontier; 15 in Secret of the Silver Blades; and 40 in Pools of Darkness.

Non-human magic users also have the following additional level limits:
  Elf: 9th if Intelligence 16 or less; 10th if Int 17; 11th if Int 18.
  Half-Elf: 6th if Intelligence 16 or less; 7th if Int 17; 8th if Int 18.
(Unearthed Arcana has rules for extending these level limits with especially
high statistics, but the Gold Box games do not use them.)

The prime statistic of a magic-user is Intelligence.  A magic-user has a
minimum requirement of Intelligence 9, though you can "M"odify a character to
start with less.  Single-classed magic-users with Intelligence 16 or higher
receive a 10% bonus to experience earned.

A magic-user may only wield a dagger, darts, or a staff, and cannot cast
magic-user spells in armor unless either multi-classed, or dual-classed with
9th level or higher ranger.

A magic-user does not automatically learn all spells of a given spell level,
unlike a cleric.  One spell may be chosen to be automatically learned every new
character level; additional spells may be learned by finding and studying
magic-user spell scrolls.  Magic-users may cast magic-user spells from scrolls.

There are minimum Intelligence requirements for 5th and higher level spells:
10 Intelligence for 5th level spells, 12 for 6th, 14 for 7th, 16 for 8th, and
18 for 9th.

A magic-user in the tabletop game may enchant items or scribe magic scrolls
starting at 11th level, and may construct a stronghold at 12th level.  Pool of
Radiance also does not enforce the minimum other statistics that other Gold Box
games and the tabletop game do.

Note that for the multi-classed elf and half-elf magic-users I recommend, your
Intelligence score has no effect whatsoever in this game -- it only matters
for single-classed magic-users or in the sequels.

SECTION 7.7.4 - Class: Thief
----------------------------

                                  Find/
                    Pick   Open  Remove    Move  Hide in   Hear  Climb   Read
Level       Exp.  Pocket  Locks   Traps  Silent  Shadows  Noise  Walls  Lang.
    1          0     30%    25%     20%     15%      10%    10%    85%      -
    2      1,251     35%    29%     25%     21%      15%    10%    86%      -
    3      2,501     40%    33%     30%     27%      20%    15%    87%      -
    4      5,001     45%    37%     35%     33%      25%    15%    88%    20%
    5     10,001     50%    42%     40%     40%      31%    20%    90%    25%
    6     20,001     55%    47%     45%     47%      37%    20%    92%    30%
    7     42,501     60%    52%     50%     55%      43%    25%    94%    35%
    8     70,001     65%    57%     55%     62%      49%    25%    96%    40%
    9    110,001     70%    62%     60%     70%      56%    30%    98%    45%
   10    160,001     80%    67%     65%     78%      63%    30%    99%    50%
   11    220,001     90%    72%     70%     86%      70%    35%  99.1%    55%
   12    440,001    100%    77%     75%     94%      77%    35%  99.2%    60%
   13    660,001    105%    82%     80%     99%      85%    40%  99.3%    65%
   14    880,001    110%    87%     85%     99%      93%    40%  99.4%    70%
   15  1,100,001    115%    92%     90%     99%      99%    50%  99.5%    75%
   16  1,320,001    125%    97%     95%     99%      99%    50%  99.6%    80%
  17+ 1,540,001+    125%    99%     99%     99%      99%    55%  99.7%    80%

Any race may become a thief.  They may be of any alignment other than lawful
good or chaotic good.  (That's an accurate adaptation of the tabletop game
rules, but how does it make any kind of sense that a thief can be neutral good
but not chaotic good?)

Thieves gain 1d6 hit points per level until level 10, modified by Constitution,
then exactly 2 hit points per level thereafter.

After reaching 11th level, each further thief level requires 220,000 additional
experience.

Thieves have a maximum level of 8 in Gateway to the Savage Frontier; 9 in Pool
of Radiance; 12 in Curse of the Azure Bonds and Treasure of the Savage
Frontier; 18 in Secret of the Silver Blades; and 40 in Pools of Darkness.

Thieves do not have any racial level limits.

The prime statistic of a thief is Dexterity.  A thief has a minimum requirement
of Dexterity 9, though you can "M"odify a character to start with less.
Single-classed thieves with Dexterity 16 or higher receive a 10% bonus to
experience earned.

A thief may wield a club, dagger, dart, short bow, sling, short sword, broad
sword, or long sword, and may wear leather armor or elven chain.

Thieves who are not wearing armor other than leather or elven chain may
backstab an opponent, if wielding a club, dagger, or one-handed sword.  This
can be done by attacking an opponent opposite an ally that has attacked the
same enemy, without the enemy taking action in between.  Such an attack gets a
+4 bonus to hit, and if it hits:
* 2x damage if the thief is level 1-4
* 3x damage if the thief is level 5-8
* 4x damage if the thief is level 9-12
* 5x damage if the thief is level 13 or higher.

The techniques that work to reliably get a backstab in later Gold Box games
don't always work here.  (There is no requirement that the target be humanoid
as there is in later editions.)

Adjust thief abilities as follows:

1. Adjust for Dexterity (see Dexterity table), but only do so at 2nd or higher
   level (the lack of this at 1st level is a bug).
2. There is an adjustment for non-humans:

                       Find/
          Pick  Open  Remove    Move  Hide in   Hear  Climb   Read
Race    Pocket  Lock   Traps  Silent  Shadows  Noise  Walls  Lang.
Dwarf           +10%    +15%                           -10%    -5%
Elf        +5%   -5%             +5%     +10%    +5%
Gnome            +5%    +10%     +5%      +5%   +10%   -15%
Half-Elf  +10%                            +5%
Halfling   +5%   +5%     +5%    +10%     +15%    +5%   -15%    -5%

3. For Pick Pocket: Adjust by -5% per victim level above 3rd.  If the roll
   fails by more than 20%, the victim notices the attempt.
4. Wearing armor heavier than leather can weaken or eliminate entirely these

   skills.  (This is only sometimes checked for.  The additional rules in
   Unearthed Arcana for the effect of armor upon thief skills do not appear to
   apply.)

Starting at 10th level, a thief may cast spells from magic-user scrolls with a
75% chance of success.

Thieves are not required to avoid shields to use their thief abilities, as they
must in the tabletop game.

A thief in the tabletop game understand the "Thieves' Cant", and can construct
a headquarters for a gang of thieves starting at 10th level.  The Gold Box
games round the tenths of percentage points for the Climb Walls skill
downwards.  Pool of Radiance also does not enforce the minimum other statistics
that other Gold Box games and the tabletop game do.

SECTION 7.8.1 - Calculating THAC0
---------------------------------

Here is how to calculate your THAC0, which is the official 2nd Edition rule for
accuracy in physical combat.  Note that (1) the LOWER the better; (2) in many
cases, the game will not use the value actually shown on the screen.

You may not specifically target an enemy that is currently blinked out, launch
a ranged attack against a specific enemy that you cannot see, or use a ranged
weapon if an enemy is adjacent do you.

1. Begin with the appropriate number for your class and level from the
   following table.  Multi-classed and dual-classed characters should select
   the most favorable value.  The following table is actually a hybrid of the
   larger 1st Edition tables and the smaller 2nd Edition table:

           ---------------------------- Level ----------------------------
Class       1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21+
Cleric     20 20 20 18 18 18 16 16 16 14 14 14 12 12 12 10 10 10  9  9  9
Warrior    20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1  1
Magic-user 20 20 20 20 20 19 19 19 19 19 17 17 17 17 17 14 14 14 14 14 12
Thief      20 20 20 20 19 19 19 19 16 16 16 16 14 14 14 14 12 12 12 12 10

   This table varies by specific Gold Box game; most importantly, warrior THAC0
   caps at level 17 in Pools of Darkness.
2. Subtract the magical bonus of the weapon you are attacking with.  If you are
   using a bow and arrows or crossbow and bolts, apply only the launcher bonus.
3. If you are using a melee weapon, adjust by the Strength to-hit modifier.  If
   you are using a thrown or missile weapon, adjust by the Dexterity to-hit
   modifier.
4. Racial bonuses: Subtract 1 if one of the following applies:
   a. You are a dwarf attacking a goblin, half-orc, hobgoblin, or orc
   b. You are an elf attacking with a short sword, long sword, or any bow
   c. You are a gnome attacking a goblin or kobold
5. Some combats may apply an ad hoc bonus or penalty; taller races receive a +2
   penalty to THAC0 in the constricted tunnels of the Kobold Caves, for
   instance.
6. If attacking at a distance, add 2 for medium range and 5 for long range.
7. If your opponent is invisible and you cannot see invisible, add 4.
8. If the following conditions are met:
   * You are a thief
   * You are not wearing armor other than leather armor or elven chain
   * You are wielding a club, dagger, or one-handed sword
   * You are attacking opposite an ally who has attacked the enemy
   ... then this attack may be a backstab: subtract 4.  (This does not work as
   reliably as it does in later Gold Box games.)
9. Adjust for the effect of the following spells you are affected by:
   Bless (C1): -1
   Curse (C1): +1
   Cause Blindness (C3): +4
   Bestow Curse (C3): +4
   Prayer (C3): -1 for friendly effect, +1 for hostile effect, 0 for both

(The tabletop game rules adjust for specific weapons against specific Armor
Class values, but the Gold Box games do not enforce these rules.  The penalty
for firing ranged weapons into mixed melee combatants also is not enforced; the
tabletop game doesn't let you freely fire arrows through your front-line
fighters.)

SECTION 7.8.2 - Calculating Armor Class
---------------------------------------

Here is how to calculate Armor Class (AC).  Note that (1) the LOWER the better;
(2) in many cases, the game will not use the value actually shown on the
screen; (3) unlike the tabletop game and many other classic CRPGs, improving AC
below -10 does continue to help.

1. Begin with 10 for a character you created.  Some monsters, even humans,
   start with a different base value.
2. Replace with 10 minus the base protective value of any equipped armor, if
   this is lower than the above.  If not wearing any armor, but are wearing
   Bracers of Defense, instead replace with 10 minus its base protective value.
3. If the defender is wearing magical armor, subtract the bonus on the armor.
4. If the defender is wearing a Ring of Protection and is not wearing magical
   armor (Bracers of Defense are not armor), subtract the bonus of the best
   ring.
5. If the defender has a shield equipped, and is not being attacked from
   behind or coughing from a Stinking Cloud, subtract (1 + bonus on shield).
   (The tabletop game rule about a shield not applying to more than three
   enemies per round is not enforced.)
6. If under the effect of a Shield spell, it provides AC 2 against thrown
   weapons, AC 3 against arrows, bolts, and slings, and AC 4 against anything
   else, if that bonus better than that calculated in step 5 and the defender
   is not being attacked from behind.  This spell does not affect AC if your AC
   is already better.
7. If the defender is wearing a Cloak of Displacement, subtract 2.
8. If the defender is wearing a Cursed Necklace, add 5.
9. Adjust by Dexterity; skip if being attacked from behind or if coughing from
   a Stinking Cloud, even with a penalty.  (The tabletop game rule about
   Dexterity bonuses not applying to more than four enemies per round is not
   enforced.)
10. If the defender is a dwarf or gnome, subtract 4 if attacked in melee by
   certain larger enemies (see the sections on dwarves and gnomes for which
   ones).
11. If attacked from behind, add 2.
12. If blind, add 4.
13. If the defender is on a tile with a terrain feature that can offer cover,
   like a table or bush, adjust by a number dependent on what the feature is.
14. Adjust for the effects of spells:
  * Protection from Evil/Protection from Good applicable to attacker: -2
  * Stinking Cloud (coughing): +4

SECTION 7.8.3 - Calculating Chance To Hit
-----------------------------------------

One of the following special conditions may apply to a physical attack (check
in the listed order):
1. If the defender is helpless, the attack automatically hits.
2. If the defender has magical displacement, the first attack of the combat
   automatically misses.  (Displacer Beasts are not actually displaced, even
   though they should be.)
3. If the defender is protected by a Mirror Image spell, the attack has equal
   chances of affecting any of the fake defenders or the real one.  If a fake
   defender is hit, it is dispelled and the attack otherwise does no damage.
   (The chance of an image being hit is lower than it should be.)

Otherwise, roll 1d20.  A roll of 1 always misses, and a roll of 20 always
hits.  For other rolls, if the rolled number is at least equal to the
attacker's modified THAC0 minus the defender's modified Armor Class, then the
attack hits; otherwise it misses.

Rolling high on an attack roll never results in a critical hit (exception: the
Vorpal Sword in a couple later games); that optional rule was only made part of
the standard rules in 3rd Edition.

SECTION 7.8.4 - Calculating Damage
----------------------------------

If a physical attack lands, a helpless defender always takes enough damage to
become unconscious and start dying.  A non-helpless defender may be
invulnerable to the attack; the game will say that 0 damage was inflicted in
this case.

Otherwise, use the following steps to calculate damage:

1. Roll dice according to attacker's weapon and the size of the defender.  A
   defender that is either Large in the tabletop game *or* has an icon taking
   more than one tile counts as Large for this purpose.
2. Add the bonus from a magical weapon.  If you are using a bow and arrows or
   crossbow and bolts, only the bonus from the ammunition is supposed to count,
   but Pool of Radiance also adds the launcher bonus here (later Gold Box games
   properly do not add the launcher bonus).
3. Adjust by Strength damage bonus if attacking with a melee weapon, or
   launching an arrow using a fine composite long bow.
4. If you are a ranger (only possible in later games) attacking with in melee,
   add 1 per ranger level if your target is giant-class.
5. If you are a thief who has just successfully landed a backstab, multiply
   by: 2 if 1st-4th level, 3 if 5th-8th level, 4 if 9th-12th level, or 5 if
   13th level or higher.
6. Some monsters halve damage taken from physical attacks (see individual
   monster entries for details).  Damage taken by the defender cannot be
   reduced below 1 unless the defender is outright immune to the attack.

SECTION 7.9.1 - Resisting Magical Attacks
-----------------------------------------

Magic may be resisted in these ways:

* Some monsters are immune to the effect of some spells.  The most important
  case is immunity to the Sleep spell; Sleep cannot affect undead, or monsters
  with 6 or more levels or hit dice.

* Some monsters have magic resistance.  PCs very rarely have magic resistance
  before 3rd Edition rules, with the exception of elven and half-elven magic
  resistance to charm and sleep magic.  This is a percentage roll; if the check
  passes, the magic simply does not affect the defender.

* If the magic resistance check fails or was never made, many magic spells also
  permit a saving throw, described in the next section.  If this is passed, the
  effect of the spell may be either reduced or nullified depending on the
  spell.

SECTION 7.9.2 - The Saving Throw
--------------------------------

To find base saving throws, choose the row for class and level, then the
leftmost appropriate column -- usually; exceptions exist, stated in individual
entries, and the Gold Box games have more divergences.  Multi-classed and dual-
classed characters use whichever row is most favorable.

For monsters, the general rule is: save as a fighter of a level equal to hit
dice; use a different class if applicable; divide effective level by 2 if
non-intelligent.  All monsters have saving throws explicitly defined in the
game files, so the game doesn't have to do this calculation for them as a human
DM does.  Monster equipment does not affect their saving throws.

Items always survive attacks; you never have to worry about fireballs causing
equipment to make saving throws to avoid destruction as you would in the
tabletop game and in some other CRPGs.

                  | Paralyz./ |           | Rod/   |        |
                  | Poison/   | Petrif./  | Staff/ | Breath |
CLASS      LEVELS | Death     | Polymorph | Wand   | Weapon | Spell
Cleric       1-3  |    10     |    13     |   14   |   16   |  15
             4-6  |     9     |    12     |   13   |   15   |  14
             7-9  |     7     |    10     |   11   |   13   |  12
           10-12  |     6     |     9     |   10   |   12   |  11
           13-15  |     5     |     8     |    9   |   11   |  10
           16-18  |     4     |     7     |    8   |   10   |   9
             19+  |     2     |     5     |    6   |    8   |   7
Fighter,       0  |    16     |    17     |   18   |   20   |  19
Paladin,     1-2  |    14     |    15     |   16   |   17   |  17
or Ranger    3-4  |    13     |    14     |   15   |   16   |  16
             5-6  |    11     |    12     |   13   |   13   |  14
             7-8  |    10     |    11     |   12   |   12   |  13
            9-10  |     8     |     9     |   10   |    9   |  11
           11-12  |     7     |     8     |    9   |    8   |  10
           13-14  |     5     |     6     |    7   |    5   |   8
           15-16  |     4     |     5     |    6   |    4   |   7
             17+  |     3     |     4     |    5   |    4   |   6
Magic-User   1-5  |    14     |    13     |   11   |   15   |  12
            6-10  |    13     |    11     |    9   |   13   |  10
           11-15  |    11     |     9     |    7   |   11   |   8
           16-20  |    10     |     7     |    5   |    9   |   6
             21+  |     8     |     5     |    3   |    7   |   4
Thief        1-4  |    13     |    12     |   14   |   16   |  15
             5-8  |    12     |    11     |   12   |   15   |  13
            9-12  |    11     |    10     |   10   |   14   |  11
           13-16  |    10     |     9     |    8   |   13   |   9
           17-20  |     9     |     8     |    6   |   12   |   7
             21+  |     8     |     7     |    4   |   11   |   5

Roll 1d20; a 1 is always a failure and a 20 is always a success.  Apply the
following modifiers to the roll otherwise:

1. A dwarf, gnome, or halfling receives a [Constitution / 3.5, rounded down]
   bonus to saving throws versus rod/staff/wand or spell.
2. A dwarf or halfling receives a [Constitution / 3.5, rounded down] bonus to
   saving throws versus poison.
3. Add the bonus from worn magical armor, for disintegration attacks or
   attacks which cause hit point damage; exceptions: skip this step for gas
   attacks, and electrical attacks if the magical armor is metallic.  (This is
   the tabletop game rule; I'm doubtful it actually applies here.)
4. Add the bonus from the best equipped Ring of Protection.  (This does not
   apply to every Ring of Protection, which isn't supposed to happen.)
5. Subtract 5 if wearing a Cursed Necklace.
6. Subtract 4 if blind.
7. If the attack is a magical one that tests willpower, apply adjustment for
   Wisdom.  This applies mostly to charm and fear spells; it does not actually
   apply to many other spells that would get this bonus applied in 3rd Edition
   or later (it doesn't apply to Hold Person in particular, which only first
   gets this bonus applied against it in 3rd Edition).
8. Adjust the roll for the following spells affecting you:
     Protection from Evil (C1/M1/M3): +2 if attacker is evil-aligned
     Protection from Good (C1/M1/M3): +2 if attacker is good-aligned
     Resist Cold (C1): +3 if attack is cold-based
     Resist Fire (C2): +3 if attack is fire-based
     Bestow Curse (C3): -4
     Prayer (C3): +1 for friendly effect, -1 for hostile effect, 0 for both
     Shield (M1): +1

Note that the level or strength of the attacker is generally not a
consideration (as it generally is in 3rd Edition and later).

If the adjusted roll is equal to or greater than your base saving throw, the
saving throw succeeds; otherwise it fails.

The effects of the successful saving throw vary with the attack.  Hit point
damage is typically halved; any status effect is typically evaded entirely.

SECTION 7.10 - Encumbrance
--------------------------

Encumbrance is the weight in coins you are currently carrying.  You may carry
up to what is listed in the Statistic: Strength table without penalty, which
permits a base movement rate of 12.  (Equipping a Bag of Holding allows you to
carry extra weight.)

If you carry extra weight beyond that, you take the following movement
penalties:

             Base
Extra Coins  Move
      1-256     9  There is a bug that will sometimes allow you to pick up a
    257-512     6    a few extra coins above the limit of 988 extra coins.
    513-988     3

Your actual base movement is the maximum of the above and whatever your body
armor allows.  (This is modified by haste and slow magical effects, and
specific maps or combats may have ad hoc additional rules affecting movement.)

Movement also affects ability to flee:
* On the battlefield, this is only assured if you have more movement than any
  enemy that has line of sight to you.  The chance of escape is 50% in the case
  of a tie, and 0% if an enemy in line of sight has more movement.
* In the Encounter Menu, your party's chance to "F"lee may be determined by
  comparing the movement of your slowest party member to a movement constant
  defined for each monster.  This constant is often but not necessarily its
  actual combat movement.

Encumbrance does not affect your combat ability other than by restricting
movement (such other restrictions do happen in 5th Edition, and in multiple
other CRPGs).

SECTION 7.11.1 - Surprise
-------------------------

A combat may begin with one or both sides surprised.

Under standard conditions (most random combats and some fixed ones), each side
rolls 1d6, and surprises the other side with a roll of 1 or 2.  These rolls
may receive ad hoc modifiers.

If one side is surprised and the other is not, and a combat occurs, some on the
surprising side get a free round of attacks, which is more likely with high
Dexterity.  Both sides surprised is similar to but not quite the same as
neither side being surprised.  (This is all a simplification of the tabletop
game rules.)

During the free round of attacks, everyone on the attacking side may do
anything other than cast spells the normal way (the attackers may still use
magical devices and scrolls).  Surprised defenders have normal defensive
abilities, but might not have all their equipment readied, and are not allowed
any actions other than attacks of opportunity.

If surprise occurs, surprise is somehow maintained even if you parley before
combat.  (Talking was a free action before the phrase was invented!)  Parleying
with surprised monsters is more likely to have a peaceful outcome, and even
simply waiting is likely to cause the monsters to get away.  Monsters that
surprise you may immediately attack before you have a chance to talk with them.

Thieves, elves, and halflings can get bonuses to surprising the enemy in the
tabletop game, but those rules do not exist in the Gold Box games.

SECTION 7.11.2 - Initiative
--------------------------

Each individual PC or monster rolls 1d6 for base initiative.  This is modified
by Dexterity.  Creatures then take turns from lowest to highest modified
initiative.

(Initiative is not affected by Haste and Slow as it should in the tabletop
game.  Initiative is also normally rolled for whole sides, not individuals,
though that is more to save time.  In 2nd Edition, 1d10 is rolled instead of
1d6.  For comparison: the original Might and Magic uses 1d6 rolled for whole
sides; Wizardry uses 1d10 rolled for individuals, despite significantly
predating 2nd Edition AD&D.)

Any PC or monster whose turn it is may expend all movement and physical attacks
before anyone else gets a chance to do anything at all.  The only exception is
attacks of opportunity, which can occur if you either move away from an
adjacent enemy, or you move next to an enemy that chose the "G"uard command.
(The tabletop game doesn't typically let you move and attack like that; the
weapon speed modifiers that the tabletop game has are also not enforced.)

You can also freely go into your inventory and equip or unequip anything you
are carrying -- even body armor.

You may issue a command to "D"elay your move to the end of the current round.
This is useful for things like landing backstabs, or waiting your enemies to
get closer, while not actually losing an action.

Spellcasting is the only action that is not necessarily instantaneous.  Spells
require a number of segments equal to its tabletop spellcasting time divided by
3, rounded down.  If the spellcaster takes even 1 point of damage during this
time, concentration is disrupted and the spell is lost.  (There are no
Concentration skill checks until 3rd Edition.)

SECTION 7.12 - Turning Undead
-----------------------------

Clerics, and paladins in later games, have the magical power to turn undead
once per combat.  All clerics turn undead and not command them (as evil clerics
do in the tabletop game).

The turning character must have line of sight to the undead to be turned.

Find the turning number from the below table.  If there is more than one type
of undead, turning affects undead from weakest to strongest.  Turnable undead
not listed below have the necessary row listed in their bestiary entry.  (The
breaks in patterns in the table are deliberate, and even explained at length in
the 1st Edition DMG.  The 2nd Edition table removes these breaks and makes the
table regular.)

             Level of Turning Cleric (Subtract 2 for Paladins)
Undead type     1    2    3    4    5    6    7    8 9-13  14+
Skeleton       10    7    4    T    T    D    D   D*   D*   D*
Zombie         13   10    7    T    T    D    D    D   D*   D*
Ghoul          16   13   10    4    T    T    D    D    D   D*
Shadow         19   16   13    7    4    T    T    D    D   D*
Wight          20   19   16   10    7    4    T    T    D    D
Ghast               20   19   13   10    7    4    T    T    D
Wraith                   20   16   13   10    7    4    T    D
Mummy                         20   16   13   10    7    4    T
Spectre                            20   16   13   10    7    T
Vampire                                 20   16   13   10    4
Ghost                                        20   16   13    7
Lich                                              19   16   10
Special                                           20   19   13

If there is no entry, that undead cannot be turned.

Roll 1d20.  (In later games, special modifiers may apply to individual maps if
turning is especially easy or difficult.)  If the roll is at least equal to the
number in the table, 1d12 undead are turned.  For mixed groups of undead, the
same roll is used against all undead.

"T" indicates automatic turning.  "D" means that the undead is outright
destroyed, not turned.  "D*" means to replace the 1d12 undead affected with
6+1d6.

Undead that are turned but not destroyed attempt to flee from the party (as if
affected by fear), meaning you will have to chase them down if you want to
destroy them.  Since the fleeing undead can get stuck in corners and may
require a lot of tedious chasing down, in later games turned undead simply
vanish into thin air (and give no experience).

Enemy clerics are capable of turning any Animated characters you have.

SECTION 7.13 - Morale
---------------------

Morale represents the willingness of a creature to face the dangers of combat.
Your own characters never have to make morale checks, but anything else that is
not inherently fearless does.  This includes some allied NPCs.

Each monster has a base morale rating defined for each specific encounter, a
rating from 0 to 100.  (The general rules for the tabletop game are not used.)
Once the monsters lose that percentage of their starting strength, they will
start checking morale on the next round.  Monsters do not check morale
individually as in the tabletop game; all monsters with the same ID will always
behave the same given the same situation.

Anyone failing a morale roll may either flee in panic, where they will try to
run at full speed away from combat, or outright surrender.  Monsters with
Intelligence 3 or less flee.  More intelligent monsters may surrender instead
if they feel they are especially outmatched.  You do not receive experience or
items for monsters who have successfully run away, but you do from any monster
that has surrendered.

(Monsters do not make fighting retreats or orderly retreats as they do in the
tabletop game.)

Morale rating may be modified with the Bless (+5) or Curse (-5) spells.

In some cases, a morale rating isn't defined.  If this happens, what I think
is used is whatever the last monster morale rating was.

SECTION 7.14 - Party Strength
-----------------------------

Party Strength is a calculation the game performs to scale random combats to
your party, among other things.

A character's contribution to Party Strength is the sum of:
  * 0.4 * cleric level
  * 0.8 * magic-user level
  * 0.5 * each point of AC below 0 (0 if AC is 0 or above)
  * 0.5 * each point of THAC0 below 21 (0 if THAC0 is 21 or above)
  * 0.1 * current hit points
rounded down to the nearest integer.  The values used for AC and THAC0 are the
ones shown on your character screen.

Party Strength is the above for every character summed.  It will start at about
15-20 for an equipped level 1 party; a strong endgame party will be about
120-140.

Since armor taking you below AC 0 and weapons affect this calculation, you can
micromanage it by keeping such items unequipped until needed.


SECTION 8.1 - Notes on Spells
-----------------------------

Clerical spells are automatically added to the spellbooks of those eligible to
cast them.  Magic-user spells cast by magic-users are not automatically
learned; you can add one spell to your spellbook every time you gain a magic-
user level, or add them from magic-user scrolls that you find.

All spells must be prepared (memorized) before they can be cast, while
"E"ncamped.  Memorizing spells takes 15 minutes for each spell level, plus a
base preparation time depending on the highest level spell you are memorizing:

  Spell Level  Time
  1-2          4 hours
  3-4          6 hours
  5-6          8 hours
  7-8          10 hours
  9            12 hours

By tabletop game standards, all spells effectively always have a verbal
component, and never have somatic or material components: magical silence
always prevents spellcasting; there is no way to only have your arms bound so
that you cannot cast spells with somatic components; and no spellcasting
materials like diamond dust are ever required.

Casting baneful versions of clerical spells does not have the alignment
implications or restrictions that it does in the tabletop game.

Some spells depend on the hit dice of the target.  This is always a simple
integer in the Gold Box games, unlike in the tabletop game; every 4 fractional
hit dice is generally converted to a single whole hit die.  For characters,
this is equal to level, or highest level for multi-classed characters; hit dice
do not max out at level 9 to 11 as they do in the tabletop game.

A "/" in the statistics below means "per".  That's the way the documentation
and 1st Edition rules also work.

If a diameter of effect is specified, the exact area affected is:

  Diameter 3    Diameter 5     Diameter 7   An intervening wall or other hard
                                            barrier will block the effect.
                                   ***
                    ***           *****     If a buff with a diameter is cast
      ***          *****         *******    outside of combat, it affects
      *X*          **X**         ***X***    everyone in the party.
      ***          *****         *******
                    ***           *****
                                   ***

Casting times listed below are given in initiative segments, in tabletop rule
units, if they are castable in combat.  Casting spells outside combat never
takes time, unlike in the tabletop game.  Some spells cast faster than the
tabletop version; these are marked with asterisks.

The number of segments actually taken is one third of that listed, rounded
down.  So a 1-segment or 2-segment spell casts instantly; one taking 3 to 5
segments is only delayed by 1 segment; etc.  This makes combat spellcasting
significantly more powerful than in the tabletop game.

AI priority is how much the AI likes to cast the spell, with higher numbers
indicating higher likelihood.  Healing spells are much higher priority if there
is a reason to cast them.

A buff or debuff does not stack with itself; i.e., you cannot make a buff last
twice as long by casting it twice in succession.

SECTION 8.2.1 - 1st Level Cleric Spells
---------------------------------------

Clerics may memorize and cast the following spells (paladins in later games
may learn these starting at level 9):

Bless (Range: 6, Area: diameter 5, Duration: 6 minutes, Casting Time: 10, AI
  Priority: 2) -- Targets only allies who are not adjacent to enemies; provides
  a +1 bonus to hit and a +5 bonus to morale.

Curse (Range: 6, Area: diameter 5, Duration: 6 minutes, Casting Time: 10, AI
  Priority: 3) -- Targets only enemies, even those adjacent to allies.
  Inflicts a -1 penalty to hit and a -5 penalty to morale (no saving throw).

Cure Light Wounds (Range: 1, Area: 1 target, Casting Time: 5, AI Priority: 1)
  -- Restores 1d8 hit points to a creature.  This will not actually restore
  consciousness to unconscious characters until after combat.

  (In the tabletop game, this is not supposed to have any effect on undead or
  incorporeal creatures.  Pool of Radiance also predates the 3rd Edition and
  modern CRPG effect of cure spells inflicting damage on undead.)

Cause Light Wounds (Range: 1, Area: 1 target, Casting Time: 5, AI Priority: 2)
  -- If a successful melee combat attack roll is made, inflicts 1d8 damage to
  creatures affected by Cure Light Wounds (no saving throw).

Detect Magic (Range: caster, Duration: 10 minutes, Casting Time: 1*, AI
  Priority: 0) -- All magical items are indicated with an asterisk.

Protection from Evil (Range: 1, Area: 1 target, Duration: 3 minutes/level,
  Casting Time: 4, AI Priority: 1) -- Target receives a -2 bonus to Armor Class
  and to all saving throws if attacked by any creature of an evil alignment.

  (This does not have the tabletop game effect of preventing bodily contact by
  conjured or summoned creatures.)

Protection from Good (Range: 1, Area: 1 target, Duration: 3 minutes/level,
  Casting Time: 4, AI Priority: 2) -- As Protection from Evil, but protects
  against creatures of good alignment.

Resist Cold (Range: 1, Area: 1 target, Duration: 10 minutes/level, Casting
  Time: 10, AI Priority: 0) -- Target receives a +3 bonus to all saving throws
  against all cold attacks.  All cold damage taken is halved.  (Or it would, if
  there were any kind of cold attack anywhere in this game.)

SECTION 8.2.2 - 2nd Level Cleric Spells
---------------------------------------

Clerics of at least level 3 may memorize and cast the following spells
(paladins in later games may learn these starting at level 11):

Find Traps (Range: caster, Duration: 30 minutes, Non-combat only) -- Detects
  traps on an ad hoc basis.

Hold Person (Range: 6, Area: 1-3 targets, Duration: 4 minutes + 1 minute/level,
  Casting Time: 5, AI Priority: 7) -- Holds immobile up to 3 Medium-sized or
  smaller living humanoid targets.  A saving throw vs. spell (it should be vs.
  paralyzation) will negate the spell; it is at a -1 penalty if 2 creatures are
  targeted and at a -2 penalty if 1 creature is targeted.

  (This spell got nerfed in 2nd Edition, which requires all targets to be close
  to each other.  It got nerfed hard in 3rd Edition, which only allows one
  target; and targets also get additional saving throws to break free every
  round; *and* high Wisdom now grants a bonus to the saving throw.  And in 5th
  Edition, it also requires the caster to concentrate to maintain the spell.
  It's still a strong spell in 5th Edition!  All this may or may not have
  anything to do with the infamous usefulness of this spell in the Gold Box
  games.)

Resist Fire (Range: 1, Area: 1 target, Duration: 10 minutes/level, Casting
  Time: 5, AI Priority: 2) -- Target receives a +3 bonus to all saving throws
  against all fire attacks.  All fire damage taken is halved.

Silence, 15' Radius (Range: 12, Area: 1 target diameter 3, Duration: 2 minutes/
  level, Casting Time: 5, AI Priority: 4) -- Causes magical silence in the area
  of effect, which moves with the targeted creature.  A saving throw can negate
  the spell.  You are silenced in a round if you are in a silenced area at any
  time in that round.

  (This spell must be specifically take effect upon a creature here, unlike in
  the tabletop game.)

Slow Poison (Range: 1, Area: 1 target, Duration: 1 hour/level, Casting Time:
  1, AI Priority: 0) -- Target ally killed by poison will be revived (though
  with but 1 hit point to start) for the duration of the spell, even in the
  thick of combat.  The revived character will take 1 point of damage every 10
  minutes, though hit points will not drop below 1 from this damage.  If the
  target does not receive a Neutralize Poison spell by the end of this spell's
  duration, full-blown death results.

  (This does not have the tabletop game requirement of being cast within 1 turn
  per caster level of the target's death.)

Snake Charm (Range: 3, Area: All, Duration: 4+1d4 minutes, Casting Time: 5, AI
  Priority: 0) -- Charms snakes and snake-like creatures whose total hit points
  do not exceed the caster's (no saving throw), with no apparent limit on area
  affected.  Dragons are not sufficiently ophidian to count as snake-like.

Spiritual Hammer (Range: caster, Duration: 1 minute/level, Casting Time: 5, AI
  Priority: 1) -- Summons a temporary magical hammer.  It can hit enemies that
  require magical weaponry to be struck, but does not actually have any bonuses
  to hit or to damage.  This hammer can be thrown; it will magically reappear
  in the caster's hands in that case.

SECTION 8.2.3 - 3rd Level Cleric Spells
---------------------------------------

Clerics of at least level 5 may memorize and cast the following spells
(paladins in later games may learn these starting at level 13):

Animate Dead (Area: All, Casting Time: 10, AI Priority: 2) -- Raises a fallen
  enemy or enemies (if cast in combat; maximum hit points affected that of the
  caster) or a single dead PC (if cast outside of combat) as undead who act as
  an allied NPCs (who cannot cast spells).  Any target must be a PC race, so it
  won't work on things like kobolds.  Animated enemies do not stay with you
  beyond the end of combat, contrary to the documentation, but an animated PC
  remains so until either reduced to zero hit points or raised from the dead.
  Animated characters are vulnerable to being turned by enemy clerics.

  (Unlike the tabletop game, targets are animated with full hit dice and hit
  points; the range limit of 10 feet does not exist here; and the limit of
  animated dead is capped here by caster hit points and not caster levels.
  Also, you should have fun with this spell now, since it does not exist in any
  other Gold Box game.)

Cure Blindness (Range: 1, Area: 1 target, Casting Time: 10, AI Priority: 0) --
  Cures all forms of blindness.

Cause Blindness (Range: 1, Area: 1 target, Duration: indefinite, Casting Time:
  10, AI Priority: 3) -- If a successful melee combat attack roll is made,
  blinds the target; a saving throw can negate the spell.  A blinded creature
  gets a -4 penalty to all of attack rolls, Armor Class, and saving throws
  until cured.

Cure Disease (Range: 1, Area: 1 target, Non-combat only) -- Cures all disease.
  This does not remove other damage the disease may have inflicted.

Cause Disease (Range: 1, Area: 1 target, Duration: indefinite, Casting Time:
  10, AI Priority: 4) -- If a successful melee combat attack roll is made,
  causes disease in the target; a saving throw can negate the spell; the spell
  lasts until cured.  Disease drains Strength (1 per hour, permanently;
  minimum 3) and hit points (1 per 10 minutes; minimum 1) over time.

Dispel Magic (Range: 6, Area: diameter 3, Casting Time: 6, AI Priority: 5) --
  Attempts to remove all magical effects, both positive and negative, from the
  target.  A Minor Globe of Invulnerability does not block this spell.  The
  base chance per effect is 50%.  If the caster is higher level than the caster
  of the effect, add 5% per level; if lower level, subtract 2% per level.  If
  cast outside of combat, affects only the chosen character and not the entire
  party.

  (In the tabletop game, this is supposed to be automatic against the caster's
  own magic, but the Gold Box games do not keep track of who was responsible
  for each effect.  This also has no effect on magical items in any way.)

Prayer (Range: caster, Area: All, Duration: 1 minute/level, Casting Time: 6, AI
  Priority: 5) -- Provides a +1 bonus to hit and to saving throws to all
  allies, and a -1 penalty to hit and to saving throws to all enemies (no
  saving throw).

Remove Curse (Range: 1, Area: 1 target, Casting Time: 6, AI Priority: 0) --
  Enables target to unequip cursed items, and dispels the Bestow Curse debuff.

Bestow Curse (Range: 1, Area: 1 target, Duration: 10 minutes/level, Casting
  Time: 6, AI Priority: 4) -- If a successful melee combat attack roll is made,
  inflicts a -4 penalty both to attack rolls and to all saving throws; a saving
  throw negates the spell.

SECTION 8.3.1 - 1st Level Magic-user Spells
-------------------------------------------

Magic-users may learn, memorize, and cast the following spells (rangers in
later games may learn these spells starting at level 9):

Burning Hands (Range: 1, Area: 1 target, Casting Time: 1, AI Priority: 4) --
  Inflicts 1 point of fire damage per level (no saving throw).

  (The tabletop version affects a 3 square arc.)

Charm Person (Range: 12, Area: 1 target, Duration: indefinite, Casting Time: 1,
  AI Priority: 6) -- Charms one Medium-sized or smaller living humanoid target;
  a saving throw negates the spell.  You can counter a Charm Person spell with
  your own charm spell.

Detect Magic (Range: caster, Duration: 2 minutes/level, Casting Time: 1, AI
  Priority: 0) -- All magical items are indicated with an asterisk.

Enlarge (Range: 2/level, Area: 1 target, Duration: 10 minutes/level, Casting
  Time: 1, AI Priority: 0) -- Increases the Strength of the target depending on
  caster's level:
  Level 1 - Strength 18        Level 6 - Strength 18(00)
  Level 2 - Strength 18(01)    Level 7 - Strength 19
  Level 3 - Strength 18(51)    Level 8 - Strength 20
  Level 4 - Strength 18(76)    Level 9 - Strength 21
  Level 5 - Strength 18(91)    Level 10 or higher - Strength 22
  This will not lower Strength.  You can get more than Strength 18 even if not
  a warrior.

  (Both the documentation and tabletop rules say range is supposed to be
  0.5/level.  The effect is also slightly different from the tabletop rules,
  which grant Strength 17 at level 1 and Strength 18 at level 2.  If you're
  wondering where this comes from, it's in the PHB, under the Psionics power
  Expansion.)

Reduce (Range: 2/level, Area: 1 target, Duration: 10 minutes/level, Casting
  Time: 1, AI Priority: 0) -- Dispels any Enlarge spell on the target.  Does
  not actually reduce the damage of the target otherwise, as the tabletop
  version does; the documentation to later games implies this is a deliberate
  feature of the computer version.

  (Both the documentation and tabletop rules say range is supposed to be
  0.5/level.)

Friends (Range: caster, Area: All, Duration: 1 minute/level, Casting Time: 1,
  AI Priority: 0) -- Raises Charisma by 2d4, although values above 18 do not
  have any effect.

  (Contrary to both the documentation and the tabletop rules, this does not
  allow a saving throw.)

Magic Missile (Range: 6+4/level, Area: 1 target, Casting Time: 1, AI Priority:
  6) -- Fires unerring missiles that do 1d4+1 damage each (no saving throw),
  with an additional missile gained at every odd-numbered level.  You must fire
  all missiles at a single target.

  (There is no damage cap as there is in later editions; the tabletop version
  also permits you to fire missiles at different targets.)

Protection from Evil (Range: 1, Area: 1 target, Duration: 2 minutes/level,
  Casting Time: 1, AI Priority: 1) -- Same as the clerical spell, aside from
  duration and casting time.

Protection from Good (Range: 1, Area: 1 target, Duration: 2 minutes/level,
  Casting Time: 1, AI Priority: 1) -- Same as the clerical spell, aside from
  duration and casting time.

Read Magic (Range: caster, Duration: 2 minutes/level, Non-combat only) --
  Enables identification of magical scrolls readied by the caster.  This
  will then allow the spellcaster to learn such spells.  (Identifying the
  scroll in a shop does the same thing.)

Shield (Range: caster, Duration: 5 minutes/level, Casting Time: 1, AI Priority:
  3) -- This has multiple effects: (1) Target is undamaged by the Magic Missile
  spell; (2) If this is better than the caster's existing armor and shield,
  grants AC 2 against thrown weapons, AC 3 against launched missiles, and AC 4
  against melee attacks (this AC bonus does not apply against being attacked
  from behind); (3) +1 bonus to all saving throws.

Shocking Grasp (Range: 1, Area: 1 target, Casting Time: 1, AI Priority: 4) --
  If a successful melee combat attack roll is made, inflicts level+1d8
  electrical damage (no saving throw).

Sleep (Range: 3+4/level, Area: diameter 3, Duration: 5 minutes/level, Casting
  Time: 1, AI Priority: 7) -- Puts to sleep 4d4 points worth of living
  creatures (no saving throw).  Points are a function of hit dice, as follows:

  HD   Points
   0        1
   1        1
   2        2
   3        4
   4        6
   5       10 (only works on creatures that are not PC races)
  6+       20 (always unaffected)

  (This will never affect more than nine targets, because it is a diamater 3
  spell.  According to both the documentation and the tabletop game rules, this
  should have a range of 3+1/level.  The tabletop version doesn't work on 5 HD
  creatures.)

SECTION 8.3.2 - 2nd Level Magic-user Spells
-------------------------------------------

Magic-users of at least level 3 may learn, memorize, and cast the following
spells (rangers in later games may learn these starting at level 13):

Detect Invisibility (Range: caster, Duration: 5 minutes/level, Casting Time: 2,
  AI Priority: 1) -- Enables caster to see invisible creatures.

Invisibility (Range: 1, Area: 1 target, Duration: indefinite, Casting Time: 2,
  AI Priority: 2) -- Target is granted invisibility.  Invisibility is lost if
  the target attacks or casts any spell.  You cannot launch a ranged attack
  against a creature you cannot see, nor can you make an attack of opportunity
  against it if it moves away from you; even permitted attacks receive a -4
  penalty to-hit.  This effect is described in "D"isplay as "invisibility",
  which differs from "invisible".

Knock (Non-combat only) -- Attempts to open a locked or magically barred door.
  In Pool of Radiance, if you have this option and you actually have the spell
  memorized, it always works.

Mirror Image (Range: caster, Duration: 2 minutes/level, Casting Time: 2, AI
  Priority: 3) -- Creates 1d4 fake versions of the caster.  These dance about
  close to the caster, so that any attack that specifically targets the caster
  may instead target one of them instead; the caster and each of the images all
  have equal chances of being targeted.  Any fake version struck is
  automatically dispelled.  (An image has a lower chance of being struck than
  it should be.)

Ray of Enfeeblement (Range: 1+1/level, Area: 1 target, Duration: 1 minute/
  level, Casting Time: 2, AI Priority: 2) -- Reduces melee damage done by 25%
  plus 2% per level of the caster; a saving throw negates the spell.  This
  effect shows up on your character sheet under "D"isplay; it doesn't directly
  affect Strength.

  (According to both the documentation and the tabletop game rules, this should
  have a range of 1+0.25/level.  If you've heard this is a good spell, that's
  the 3rd Edition version, where it is 1st level and doesn't permit a saving
  throw.)

Stinking Cloud (Range: 3, Area: 2 by 2 square, Duration: 1 minute/level,
  Casting Time: 2, AI Priority: 7) -- Creates a 2 by 2 square cloud of choking
  gas, with its upper left corner at the targeted square.  Any breathing
  creature in the cloud who fails to save against poison is so nauseated as to
  be helpless for 1d4+1 rounds.  Even an affected creature who successfully
  saves is coughing enough so that it received a +4 penalty to Armor Class and
  loses any modifiers for Dexterity or a shield; it must save again against
  helplessness if still in the cloud next round.  A vulnerable AI-controlled
  creature is far more reluctant to enter the cloud than in later games.
  Unlike in later games, monsters do not need to re-save against this spell if
  this is cast on them while there is already a Stinking Cloud there.  The AI
  will not cast this spell unless it can catch at least one enemy in the cloud.

  (While notoriously strong in 1st Edition, this spell is less effective even
  in 2nd Edition.)

Strength (Range: 1, Area: 1 target, Duration: 1 hour/level, Non-combat only) --
  Increases Strength by 1d4 if a magic-user, 1d6 if a cleric or thief, or 1d8
  if a warrior.  For the purpose of this spell, 1 point of added Strength is
  equivalent to 10 percentage points of extraordinary Strength for a warrior.
  This cannot increase Strength above 18 for non-warriors, or above 18(00) for
  warriors.

SECTION 8.3.3 - 3rd Level Magic-user Spells
-------------------------------------------

Magic-users of at least level 5 may learn, memorize, and cast the following
spells:

Blink (Range: caster, Duration: 1 minute/level, Casting Time: 1, Combat only,
  AI Priority: 2) -- Caster starts to blink.  A blinking creature will blink
  out after acting.  Once blinked out, the creature may not be specifically
  targeted, and can only be hit by area attacks.  While this may only be cast
  in combat, it may last into a succeeding combat.

  (Unlike the tabletop game, which randomizes the blink, this will not in any
  way hamper the blinking creature's own attacks; it's a much more powerful
  defense in the Gold Box games than in the tabletop game.  A blinking creature
  may also be attacked in melee by moving into it, which I don't think was an
  intended feature, since "A"im won't work.)

Dispel Magic (Range: 12, Area: diameter 3, Casting Time: 3, AI Priority: 2) --
  Same as the clerical spell aside from range and casting time.

Fireball (Range: 10+1/level, Area: diameter 5 outdoors, diameter 7 indoors,
  Casting Time: 3, AI Priority: 7) -- Inflicts (level)d6 fire damage to each
  creature in the area of effect; a successful saving throw halves damage
  taken.  The AI will not cast this spell unless it can catch at least three
  enemies in the blast.

  (There is no damage cap as there is in later editions.)

Haste (Range: 6, Area: diameter 5, Duration: 3 minutes + 1 minute/level,
  Casting Time: 3, AI Priority: 3) -- Cancels an existing Slow effect, or
  doubles both movement and number of physical attacks; affects only allies;
  ages any affected recipients by one year.

  (This does not provide a bonus to initiative or incur a system shock check as
  the tabletop version does.)

Hold Person (Range: 12, Area: 1-4 targets, Duration: 2 minutes/level, Casting
  Time: 3, AI Priority: 6) -- All of range, number of possible targets,
  duration, and casting time are different from the 2nd level cleric spell, but
  this otherwise has the same effect.

Invisibility, 10' Radius (Range: 1, Area: diameter 3, Duration: indefinite,
  Casting Time: 3, AI Priority: 1) -- Casts Invisibility on all creatures in
  range, friend or foe.

  (Unlike the tabletop version, this invisibility is not broken even if you
  move away from the target, and even if the target itself breaks
  invisibility.)

Lightning Bolt (Range: 4+1/level, Area: 8 squares, Casting Time: 3, AI
  Priority: 7) -- The lightning bolt fired by this spell inflicts (level)d6
  electrical damage to all creatures struck; a successful saving throw halves
  damage taken.  The lightning bolt starts on the targeted square, and travels
  in the same direction for 8 squares thereafter.  If the bolt hits a wall or
  other terrain feature, it will reflect back towards the caster (and not at
  the angle of incidence).  Such a reflected bolt can thus hit creatures a
  second time, or rebound all the way to the caster.

  (There is no damage cap as there is in later editions.)

Protection from Evil, 10' Radius (Range: 1, Area: 1 target, Duration: 2
  minutes/level, Casting Time: 3, AI Priority: 1) -- As Protection from Evil
  but for casting time, and the protection extends to any adjacent ally.

Protection from Good, 10' Radius (Range: 1, Area: 1 target, Duration: 2
  minutes/ level, Casting Time: 3, AI Priority: 2) -- As Protection from Good
  but for casting time, and the protection extends to any adjacent ally.

Protection from Normal Missiles (Range: 1, Area: 1 target, Duration: 10
  minutes/level, Casting Time: 3, AI Priority: 3) -- Grants immunity to all
  nonmagical thrown weapons and nonmagical launched missiles.

  (This does not reduce the damage from magical missiles as the tabletop
  version does.)

Slow (Range: 9+1/level, Area: diameter 5, Duration: 3 minutes + 1 minute/level,
  Casting Time: 3, AI Priority: 5) -- Cancels an existing Haste spell, or
  halves both movement and number of physical attacks (no saving throw).  This
  affects only enemies, up to a maximum of 1 target/level.

  (This does not penalize initiative by 2 as the tabletop version does.)

SECTION 8.4 - Spell Summary
---------------------------

Many details (especially the effect of a successful saving throw) are elided
to fit this neatly into a table.

Duration (Dur.) is in minutes.
Casting time (CT) is in segments (and divided by 3 in Gold Box games).
"AI Pr" = AI priority; "s.t." = saving throw

Clerical                                        AI
Spell Name            Range   Area    Dur.  CT  Pr  Effect
-----------------     -----  -----  ------  --  --  --------------------
Bless                     6  dia 5       6  10   2  +1 to-hit; +5 morale
Curse                     6  dia 5       6  10   3  -1 to-hit; -5 morale
Cure Light Wounds         1  1 tar       -   5   1  cure 1d8
Cause Light Wounds        1  1 tar       -   5   2  inflict 1d8
Detect Magic           self      -      10   1   0  highlight magical
Protection from Evil      1  1 tar     3/L   4   1  +2 bonus to AC/s.t.
Protection from Good      1  1 tar     3/L   4   2  +2 bonus to AC/s.t.
Resist Cold               1  1 tar    10/L  10   0  half cold dam, +3 s.t.

Find Traps             self      -      30  NC   -  ad hoc trap detect
Hold Person               6  3 tar   4+1/L   5   7  paralyze humanoids
Resist Fire               1  1 tar  10+3/L   5   2  half fire dam, +3 s.t.
Silence, 15' radius      12  1 tar     2/L   5   4  prevents spellcasting
Slow Poison               1  1 tar    60/L   1   0  temp. poison revival
Snake Charm               3  maxHP     1/L   5   1  charm snakes
Spiritual Hammer       self      -     1/L   5   1  temp. magical hammer

Animate Dead              -  maxHP   indef  10   2  zombification
Cure Blindness            1  1 tar       -  10   0  cure blindness
Cause Blindness           1  1 tar   indef  10   3  inflict blindness
Cure Disease              1  1 tar       -  NC   -  cure disease
Cause Disease             1  1 tar   indef  10   4  inflict disease

Dispel Magic              6  dia 3       -   6   3  removes effects
Prayer                 self      -     1/L   6   5  +1/-1 to-hit/s.t.
Remove Curse              1  1 tar       -   6   0  cure curse
Bestow Curse              1  1 tar    10/L   6   4  inflict curse

Magic-User                                      AI
Spell Name            Range   Area    Dur.  CT  Pr  Effect
-----------------     -----  -----  ------  --  --  --------------------
Burning Hands             1  1 tar       -   1   4  inflict L fire
Charm Person             12  1 tar   indef   1   6  charm humanoid
Detect Magic           self      -     2/L   1   0  highlight magical
Enlarge                 2/L  1 tar    10/L   1   0  increase Strength
Reduce                  2/L  1 tar    10/L   1   0  remove Enlarge
Friends                self      -     1/L   1   0  +2d4 Charisma
Magic Missile         6+4/L  1 tar       -   1   6  inflict 1d4+1 per (L+1)/2
Protection from Evil      1  1 tar     2/L   1   1  +2 bonus to AC/s.t.
Protection from Good      1  1 tar     2/L   1   1  +2 bonus to AC/s.t.
Read Magic             self      -     2/L  NC   -  identify spell scrolls
Shield                 self      -     5/L   1   3  +1 bonus to s.t. and more
Shocking Grasp            1  1 tar       -   1   4  inflict 1d8+L electrical
Sleep                 3+4/L  dia 3     5/L   1   7  inflict sleep

Detect Invisibility    self      -     5/L   2   1  see invisible
Invisibility              1  1 tar   indef   2   2  invisibility
Knock                     -   lock       -  NC   -  magical unlock
Mirror Image           self      -     2/L   2   3  1d4 illusionary images
Ray of Enfeeblement   1+1/L  1 tar     1/L   2   2  -(25+2/L)% melee damage
Stinking Cloud            3    2x2     1/L   2   7  inflict nausea
Strength                  1  1 tar    60/L  NC   -  +1d(4 or 6 or 8) Strength

Blink                  self      -     1/L   1   2  blink
Dispel Magic             12  dia 3       -   3   2  removes effects
Fireball             10+1/L  dia ?       -   3   7  inflict Ld6 fire
Haste                     6  dia 5   3+1/L   3   3  double movement/attacks
Hold Person              12  4 tar     2/L   3   6  paralyze humanoids
Invisibility, 10'         1  dia 3   indef   3   1  invisibility
Lightning Bolt        4+1/L   8 sq       -   3   7  inflict Ld6 electrical
Prot. from Evil, 10'      1  1 tar     2/L   3   1  +2 bonus to AC/s.t.
Prot. from Good, 10'      1  1 tar     2/L   3   2  +2 bonus to AC/s.t.
Prot. Normal Missiles     1  1 tar    10/L   3   3  immunity to normal missiles
Slow                  9+1/L  dia 5   3+1/L   3   5  half movement/attacks

SECTION 8.5 - Temple Spells
---------------------------

The following curative spells are available in temples.

                     Gold
Spell                Cost
Cure Blindness       1000
Cure Disease         1000
Cure Light Wounds     100  Restores 1d8 hit points
Cure Serious Wounds   350  Restores 2d8+1 hit points
Cure Critical Wounds  600  Restores 3d8+3 hit points
Neutralize Poison    1000  Restores life to a poisoned character
Raise Dead           5500  Must roll Constitution-based resurrection check
Remove Curse         3500
Stone to Flesh       2000  Does not require system shock roll

Raise Dead works on elves, even though it's not supposed to.  A temple is thus
more skilled at healing your party than it ever will be itself.  This is
similar to how a lot of other classic CRPGs (examples include Wizardry I/II/
III/V; Ultima III/VI; Might and Magic I through VIII; Bard's Tale I/II) work,
even though this doesn't happen in the tabletop game.

Heal, Restoration, and Resurrection are not available.


SECTION 9.1 - Item Basic Mechanics
----------------------------------

Standard coin valuation is as follows:

10 copper pieces (cp)   = 1 silver piece
20 silver pieces (sp)   = 1 gold piece
 2 electrum pieces (ep) = 1 gold piece
 1 platinum pieces (pp) = 5 gold pieces

Whenever you are asked for gold, platinum is always acceptable.  The converse
is not necessarily true.

A quick way to exchange a large number of low-value coins is to go to a shop,
pool all your money, then buy something cheap like a stack of arrows.

Gems and jewelry have random values, and must be individually appraised in a
shop.  You should sell immediately at full value; otherwise, they will go to
regular inventory slots and subsequently only sell at half value.

To determine the value of a gem, roll 1d100:
  Roll  Gold Value
  1-25          10  A gem sells for an average of 275 gold.
 26-50          50
 51-70         100
 71-90         500
 91-99        1000
   100        5000

To determine the value of a piece of jewelry, roll 1d100:
  Roll  Gold Value
  1-10    100-1000  The game will pick any integer in the indicated range, not
 11-20    200-1200    just nice even multiples of 100 or 1000.
 21-40    300-1800  A piece of jewelry sells for an average of 2910 gold.
 41-50    500-3000
 51-70   1000-6000
 71-90   2000-8000
91-100  2000-12000

10 coins (or gems, or pieces of jewelry) weigh 1 pound.  (Those coins are
heavy!  They get lighter in 3rd Edition.)

Armor and weapons are based on "Armour & Weapons" by Charles John ffoulkes
(1909); yes that's a "ff", you find that in medieval English names.
Historiography has progressed in the century-plus since then.

Items do not have fully consistent attributes in the Gold Box games.  There are
many cases of almost identical items that are very slightly different, most
often in value.  You'll notice this if you collect equipment from monsters and
try to sell it -- monster equipment is worth much less than shop equipment.
For that reason a fully comprehensive description of each item is not given
below.

Inventory items have a standard value that shops appraise them at, and a weight
measured in coins.  An item is considered:
  * light if it is less than 2.5 pounds
  * medium if it is 2.5 pounds to 25.5 pounds
  * heavy if it is more than 25.5 pounds

Most magical items can be readily identified as magical with the Detect Magic
spell, and their properties can often be deduced by the effect on your visible
statistics, but the only way to formally identify most of them is to pay a shop
to do so, which costs 200 gold.  Magical scrolls may be formally identified
with the Read Magic spell.

Magical items are worth multiples of 400 experience, varying with the item.
Items that have a plus are worth 400 XP per magical plus, and Bracers of
Defense are worth 400 XP per point of AC they grant.  Money is worth:

      Type  Experience
    copper       0.005
    silver        0.05
  electrum         0.5
      gold           1
  platinum           5
       gem         250
   jewelry        2200

This experience gets divided by the number of people in your party and rounded
down.

SECTION 9.2.1 - Basic Weapons
-----------------------------

The table below describes standard weaponry you can buy.

#: base item type.
"Name": if you find a "Heavy Crossbow", in your characters' hands it actually
  functions as a Fine Composite Long Bow.
"Weight (coins)": any fractions are rounded down.  Note that most weapons in
  AD&D weigh FAR more than their real-life versions.
"Value (gold)": what a shop will think it is worth when it is buying it from
  you, which is not quite the same as what you can buy it for.
"H": hands needed to equip the item.  (Bastard swords are always two-handed in
  this game.)
"T": damage type: B for bashing, P for piercing, S for slashing.  Some monsters
  may take reduced damage from specific damage types; the most common case is
  skeletons taking half damage from P or S weapons.  Some of these also don't
  make much sense (all of them P and S getting reversed); the only case where
  that makes any difference is against a Juju Zombie.  The game does not
  support having more than one damage type, which in real life was why many of
  these weapons even existed.
"Damage v. S/M": damage weapon does against Small or Medium opponents (in most
  cases, creatures that occupy only one tile).
"Damage v. L+": damage weapon does against Large or larger opponents (in most
  cases, creatures that occupy two or more tiles).
"Thrown Range": this weapon may also be thrown; ranges are short/medium/long.

MELEE WEAPONS              Weight  Value        Damage  Damage
  # Name                  (coins) (gold)  H  T  v. S/M   v. L+  Thrown Range
  1 Battle Axe                 75      5  1  P     1d8     1d8
  2 Hand Axe                   50      1  1  S     1d6     1d4  1/2/3
  3 Bardiche                  125      7  2  S     2d4     3d4
  4 Bec De Corbin             100      6  2  S     1d8     1d6
  5 Bill-Guisarme             150      6  2  S     2d4    1d10
  6 Bo Stick                   15      1  1  B     1d6     1d3
  7 Club                       30      1  1  B     1d6     1d3  1/2/3
  8 Dagger                     10      2  1  P     1d4     1d3
 10 Fauchard                   60      3  2  S     1d6     1d8
 11 Fauchard-Fork              80      8  2  S     1d8    1d10
 12 Flail                     150      3  1  B   1d6+1     2d4
 13 Military Fork              75      4  2  S     1d8     2d4
 14 Glaive                     75      6  2  S     1d6    1d10
 15 Glaive-Guisarme           100     10  2  S     2d4     2d6
 16 Guisarme                   80      5  2  S     2d4     1d8
 17 Guisarme-Voulge           150      7  2  S     2d4     2d4
 18 Halberd                   175      9  2  S    1d10     2d6
 19 Lucern Hammer             150      7  2  P     2d4     1d6
 20 Hammer                     50      1  1  B   1d4+1     1d4  1/2/3
 22 Jo Stick                   40      1  1  B     1d6     1d4
 23 Mace                      100      8  1  B   1d6+1     1d6
 24 Morning Star              125      5  1  B     2d4   1d6+1
 25 Partisan                   80     10  2  S     1d6   1d6+1
 26 Military Pick              60      8  1  P   1d6+1     2d4
 27 Awl Pike                   80      3  2  P     1d6    1d12
 29 Ranseur                    50      4  2  S     2d4     2d4
 30 Scimitar                   40     15  1  S     1d8     1d8
 31 Spear                      50      1  2  P     1d6     1d8  1/2/3
 32 Spetum                     50      3  2  S   1d6+1     2d6
 33 Quarter Staff              50      1  2  B     1d6     1d6
 34 Bastard Sword             100     25  2  S     2d4     2d8
 35 Broad Sword                75     10  1  S     2d4   1d6+1
 36 Long Sword                 60     15  1  S     1d8    1d12
 37 Short Sword                35      8  1  S     1d6     1d8
 38 Two-Handed Sword          250     30  2  S    1d10     3d6
 39 Trident                    50      4  1  S   1d6+1     3d4
 40 Voulge                    125      2  2  S     2d4     2d4

For the below, "Range" gives how far short, medium, and long range are; "RoF"
is rate of fire (number of missiles that can be fired per round).  Holy water
only works against vulnerable enemies, usually undead.
LAUNCHERS                  Weight  Value        Damage  Damage
  # Name                  (coins) (gold)  H  T  v. S/M   v. L+  Range    RoF
 41 Composite Long Bow         80    100  2  fires arrows       7/14/21  2
 42 Composite Short Bow        50     75  2  fires arrows       6/12/18  2
 43 Long Bow                  100     60  2  fires arrows       7/14/21  2
 44 Short Bow                  50     15  2  fires arrows       5/10/15  2
 45 Fine Composite Long Bow    60  25000  2  fires arrows w/Str 6/12/19  1
 46 Light Crossbow             50     12  2  fires quarrels     6/12/18  1
 47 Sling                       2      0  1  B   1d4+1   1d6+1  6/12/20  1
AMMUNITION
 28 Quarrel                     0.15   0  0  P     1d4     1d4
 73 Arrow                       0.4    0  0  S     1d6     1d6
THROWN WEAPONS
  9 Dart                        1.25   0  1  P     1d3     1d2  2/4/6    3
 21 Javelin                    10      0  1  P     1d6     1d6  2/4/6    1
 85 Holy Water Vial            10     25  1  S     2d4     2d4  1/2/3    1
 86 Flask of Oil               30      1  1  S     2d6     2d6  1/2/3    1

SILVER WEAPONS
These perform the same as their regular equivalents, except they can do damage
to some monsters immune to regular weapons.
                           Weight  Value        Damage  Damage
  # Name                  (coins) (gold)  H  T  v. S/M   v. L+
  8 Silver Dagger              10     20  1  P     1d4     1d3
 23 Silver Mace               100     80  1  B   1d6+1     1d6
 34 Silver Bastard Sword      100    250  2  S     2d4     2d8
 35 Silver Broad Sword         75    100  1  S     2d4   1d6+1
 36 Silver Long Sword          60    150  1  S     1d8    1d12
 37 Silver Short Sword         35     80  1  S     1d6     1d8
 38 Silver Two-Handed Sword   250    300  2  S    1d10     3d6

 28 Silver Quarrel              3     20  0  P     1d4     1d4
 73 Silver Arrow                0.5    1  0  S     1d6     1d6

SECTION 9.2.2 - Basic Armor
---------------------------

The table below describes standard armor you can buy.

#: base item type.
"Name": note that "mail" here doesn't have the modern technical meaning of
  specifically armor made of linked rings.  By 1st Edition rules, "plate armor"
  is different from "plate mail", and is too technologically advanced to exist.
  Sometimes you run into items called "plate armor", but they function as plate
  mail and not plate armor (in later editions of the tabletop game, plate armor
  is available, and is better than plate mail).
"Weight (coins)": these numbers make more sense than the weapon numbers above,
  but these still aren't very realistic.
"Value (gold)": what a shop will think it is worth when it is buying it from
  you, which is not quite the same as what you can buy it for.
"AC": bonus to Armor Class provided by wearing this.
"Max Move": maximum normal movement while wearing this armor, if you are
  otherwise not heavily burdened.

BODY ARMOR                 Weight  Value       Max
  # Name                  (coins) (gold)  AC  Move
 50 Leather Armor             150      5   2    12
 51 Padded Armor              100      4   2     9
 52 Studded Leather Armor     200     15   3     9
 53 Ring Mail                 250     30   3     9
 54 Scale Mail                400     45   4     6
 55 Chain Mail                300     75   5     9
 56 Splint Mail               400     80   6     6
 57 Banded Mail               350     90   6     9
 58 Plate Mail                450    400   7     6
HELD IN OFF-HAND
 59 Shield                    100     15   1
 71 Silver Mirror              10     20   0  can reflect gaze attacks

FANCY BODY ARMOR (these don't accomplish anything additional)
 55 Silver Chain Mail         300    750   5     9
 58 Silver Plate Mail         450   4000   7     6

SECTION 9.2.3 - Other Items
---------------------------

Other base items in this game have the following item types (this is not
comprehensive):

  # Name
 61 Magic-User Scroll
 62 Clerical Scroll
 63 Gauntlets
 67 Cloak
 68 Boots
 69 Ring
 70 [lots of random items are this]
 71 Holy Symbol [of Sune/Tempus/Tyr], Potion
 72 [lots of random items are this]
 74 Leather Holy Symbol [of Bane]
 75 Brass Key
 76 Cursed Necklace
 77 Bracers
 78 Wand
 79 Wand
 82 Efreeti Bottle
 84 Potion of Giant Strength
 87 Boulder
 90 Ring of Feather Falling
 91 Pass
 92 Cloak
 93 Ring of Protection

SECTION 9.3 - Magic Items
-------------------------

Standard magical melee weapons and thrown weapons add their plus as a bonus
both to hit and to damage.  Bows and crossbows are supposed to add their plus
only to hit, but unlike later Gold Box games and tabletop rules also add to
damage; arrows and bolts add their plus only to damage.

Standard magical armor add their plus as a bonus to Armor Class when worn, and
if its base armor type decreases movement, the magical version increases net
movement by 3.

Magical scrolls come in both clerical and magic-user types.    Spellcasting
from a scroll is instantaneous, and have an effective spell level of whichever
is higher of either 6, or the minimum class level needed to cast the spell plus
1.  (So in Pool of Radiance, it will always be 6.)

Magic-user spells may be permanently learned from the scroll, which consumes
that use of the spell.  In later games, thieves of at least level 10 may
attempt to use such scrolls.

Clerical spells include Restoration, which in this game may only be cast from
scrolls.  This will restore lost levels to a character that has been drained by
level-draining undead, but you will still lose any progress towards the next
level.

Magical wands start with a defined number of charges if not random, often less
than the 80+1d20 you would find in the tabletop game.  In general, charged
items in the tabletop game are far more useful than they are in CRPGs; regular
spellcasting is much faster than it is supposed to be.

You may not equip more than two magical rings at once.

Other magical items include:

Bag of Holding -- If equipped, causes all coins and unequipped items to have no
  weight, with an upper limit of 5000 coins of extra carrying capacity.  It may
  take several pick up attempts to actually do so (which is a bug).
Bracers of Defense ("Bracers AC #") -- These do not count as armor and will not
  stack with it, but will set base Armor Class to the indicated number.  It's
  generally the defensive equipment of choice on thieves and pure magic-users.
Cloak of Displacement -- Grants a -2 bonus to Armor Class; the first physical
  attack per combat will automatically miss against someone wearing this.
  (This does not grant a bonus to saving throws, as the tabletop version does.)
Cloak of Elvenkind -- This makes the wearer invisible outdoors 95% of the time.
  (In the tabletop version, the quality of the invisibility depends upon
  terrain.)
Cursed Necklace -- This penalizes both AC and all saving throws by 5.  This is
  bad for actual gameplay, but fantastic for experiments.
Dust of Disappearance -- This will make the entire party invisible for 20d10
  minutes.  This is a special form of invisibility that is not dispelled by
  attacking or spellcasting.  Yes, it is very powerful -- there is a reason
  this does not exist at all in Gold Box games later than Curse of the Azure
  Bonds.  This effect is described in "D"isplay as "invisible", which differs
  from the normal "invisibility".
Efreeti Bottle -- The efreeti in this bottle will emerge to help you fight
  against the vampire in the Valhingen Graveyard when you first encounter it.
Gauntlets of Ogre Power -- Wearing this raises Strength to 18(00).
Javelin of Lightning -- This single-shot consumable creates a lightning bolt
  that does 20+1d6 electrical damage.  This acts like the magic-user spell, but
  with a range of 9, and the bolt only travels 3 squares.
Keoghtum's Ointment -- A jar of this has 5 applications, each of which will
  restores 8+1d4 hit points of damage and cure disease.  (The tabletop version
  of "Keoghtom's" ointment also neutralizes poison.  The Gold Box version seems
  to convert poisoned characters to outright dead ones.  I don't think that's
  the intended meaning of "neutralize".)
Long Sword +2 Flame Tongue -- This is supposed to do extra damage against
  creatures that use cold, birds, undead, or fire-vulnerable creatures, but it
  doesn't.  It also should prevent trolls from regenerating, but that doesn't
  happen either (and it doesn't do extra damage against those as it should).
  So this is just a Long Sword +2.
Manual of Bodily Health -- Using this book consumes it; after 24 hours, the
  user will start to train over the course of one month (always 30 days in the
  Forgotten Realms).  At the end, +1 permanent Constitution is gained.  Unlike
  the tabletop game, you may benefit from such an item more than once, and you
  can in fact use and benefit from several at once.  This is the only way to
  permanently gain base statistics in any of the Gold Box games.
Necklace of Missiles -- shoots range 7 fireballs (as the 3rd-level magic-user
  spell) that do 6d6 damage.  Normally, this only has several charges; if you
  find this as a random magical item, it may have a very large number of
  charges.
Potion of Extra Healing -- has three doses, each of which restores 1d8 hit
  points of damage.
Potion of Giant Strength -- grants frost giant (21) Strength for 4+1d4 turns
  (50-80 minutes) to a fighter.
Potion of Healing -- restores 2d4+2 hit points of damage.
Potion of Speed -- acts as a Haste spell that lasts for 5d4 rounds (doubles
  movement and number of physical attacks, at the cost of magically aging the
  user by 1 year).
Ring of Feather Falling -- prevents falling damage.  Or at least it is supposed
  to; it doesn't actually prevent damage from falls that I have seen.
Ring of Fire Resistance -- grants a +4 bonus to saving throws against fire, and
  subtracts 2 (minimum 1) from each die of damage.
Ring of Invisibility -- this casts the Invisibility spell on the wearer when
  equipped.  This item is unlimited in use, and unlike the One Ring, the
  invisibility persists even if the ring is removed; it is only canceled by
  attacking or casting a spell.
Ring of Protection -- this grants its bonus of the best ring: (1) to Armor
  Class if the wearer is not also wearing magical armor; (2) to all saving
  throws.  (The second effect is not present on some Rings of Protection.)
Sling of Seeking +2 -- this grants its bonus both to hit and to damage (though
  this is not actually special in Pool of Radiance, because magical bows
  incorrectly do the same).
Wand of Fireballs -- shoots fireballs (as the 3rd-level magic-user spell,
  except the saving throw is vs. rod/staff/wand) which do 6d6 damage.
Wand of Lightning (Bolt) -- shoots lightning bolts (as the 3rd-level magic-user
  spell, except the saving throw is vs. rod/staff/wand) which do 6d6 damage.
Wand of Magic Missiles -- shoots 2 magic missiles (as the 1st-level magic-user
  spell), which do 2d4+2 damage to a single target.
Wand of Paralyzation -- attempts to hold any single monster (range 6) for 5d4
  rounds; a saving throw vs. rod/staff/wand negates.  (Yes, the DMG says to use
  that saving throw.)

SECTION 9.4 - Random Magical Items
----------------------------------

Random magical items may be one of the following.  Weapons, armor, shields,
and Rings of Protection are any of +1 (70% chance), +2 (25% chance), or +3
(5% chance).  Items marked with an asterisk only ever appear as random items,
as far as I know.

Occasionally you will get a buggy item with a buggy name (sometimes no name at
all).

any weapon; darts appear in stacks of 5, arrows and bolts in stacks of 10.
 (Who in the Forgotten Realms is making all these magical polearms?)
any armor or shield
Clerical Scroll (with 1d3 spells, each of level 1d3)
Magic-User Scroll (with 1d3 spells, each of level 1d3)
Bag of Holding*
Bracers of Defense (any of AC 6, AC 4, AC 3, AC 2)
Cloak of Elvenkind*
Keoghtum's Ointment*
Necklace of Missiles (has a lot of charges as a random magical item)
Potion of Extra Healing
Potion of Giant Strength
Potion of Healing
Ring of Fire Resistance
Ring of Invisibility*
Ring of Protection
Wand of Fireballs*
Wand of Magic Missiles

SECTION 9.5 - Summary of Locations with Magic Items
---------------------------------------------------

Here is a checklist of noteworthy magical items you may find in the game, by
location.  Numbers indicate locations on the corresponding maps.  This is not
comprehensive for sake of brevity; check the maps' notes for more details.

Civilized Area (New Phlan)
Once you become strong enough, and are about to complete a mission, you can
fight the city guards for magical items, then get the mission reward to negate
anger:
* 4th level fighter (Long Sword +1, Chain Mail +1)
* 6th level fighter (Two-Handed Sword +2, Chain Mail +1, Javelin of Lightning)
* 8th level fighter (Two-Handed Sword +2, Plate Mail +2, Ring of Protection +3)
* 7th level cleric (Mace +2, Banded Mail +2)

The Slums
2 - Leather Armor +1
3 - Short Bow +1, 20 Arrows +1
4 - Bracers AC 6
5 - Short Bow +1, 20 Arrows +1
6 - Ring of Protection +1, Short Bow +1
7 - 3 Broad Swords +1, Chain Mail +1, Flail +1
13 - Shield +1, Magic-User Scroll (Magic Missile)
14 - 1 random magic item
16 - 3 random magic items

Sokal Keep
5 - Hammer +1
9 - Shield +1, Long Sword +1, Chain Mail +1, Mace +2

Kuto's Well
4 - Banded Mail +1, Quarter Staff +1, Bracers AC 4

Kuto's Well Catacombs
2 - Long Sword +1

Mendor's Library
1 - Potion of Giant Strength, Cloak of Displacement,
    Clerical Scroll (Restoration, Restoration)
7 - 3 Potions of Extra Healing
10 - Manual of Bodily Health

Podal Plaza
2 - 2 Long Swords +1

Cadorna Textile House
7 - Magic-User Scroll (Reduce, Detect Invisibility, Fireball),
    Magic-User Scroll (Burning Hands, Mirror Image, Blink)
11 - Gauntlets of Ogre Power (wherever you get the box opened)

Kovel Mansion
1 - Shield +2, Chain Mail +1
6 - Magic-User Scroll (Fireball, Haste, Hold Person),
    Magic-User Scroll (Blink, Ray of Enfeeblement, Slow),
    Clerical Scroll (Hold Person, Cure Blindness, Bestow Curse),
    Clerical Scroll (Prayer, Remove Curse, Animate Dead),
    Magic-User Scroll (Reduce, Detect Invisibility, Fireball),
    Magic-User Scroll (Burning Hands, Mirror Image, Blink)
10 - Short Sword +2, Leather Armor +4

Wealthy Area
4 - Potion of Extra Healing, Ring of Feather Falling

Temple of Bane
1a - Clerical Scroll (Animate Dead, Cause Disease, Prayer),
     Magic-User Scroll (Fireball, Ray of Enfeeblement, Stinking Cloud)
1b - Potion of Giant Strength, Potion of Speed, Wand of Magic Missiles (20
     charges), Dust of Disappearance

Wilderness
a few lairs contain 1 random magical item

Nomad Camp
If you attack the nomads: Long Sword +2, Shield +1, Scale Mail +2, Dagger +2,
  Bracers AC 2, Wand of Magic Missiles (50 charges)
If you attack only the kobolds: Two-Handed Sword +2, Wand of Magic Missiles
  (35 charges)

Kobold Caves
5 - 2 random magical items
14 - 2 Two-Handed Swords +2
18 - Magic-User Scroll (Charm Person, Protection from Evil, Strength),
     Magic-User Scroll (Friends, Invisibility, Protection from Normal Missiles)

Yarash's Pyramid
16 - Bracers AC 4, Wand of Paralyzation (23 charges), Potion of Speed
19 (three different locations) - 3 random magical items

Lizardman Keep
P4, P5, P6 (three different locations) - Shield +2

Buccaneer Base
The captain carries: Long Sword +4, Shield +2, Plate Mail +3

Zhentil Keep Outpost
3 - Gauntlets of Ogre Power, Plate Mail +2, Shield +1, 2 Rings of Fire
    Resistance, 3 Potions of Extra Healing, Javelin of Lightning, Bracers AC 3,
    Wand of Lightning (20 charges)

Valhingen Graveyard
3 - 4 Clerical Scrolls (Restoration, Restoration)
10 - Wand of Lightning Bolt (3 charges), 2 Clerical Scrolls (Restoration,
     Restoration)
13 - Hammer +3, Sling of Seeking +2, Potion of Extra Healing,
     Clerical Scroll (Restoration, Restoration),
     Magic-User Scroll (Slow, Hold Person, Invisibility 10' Radius)
18 - Plate Mail +2, Long Sword +2 (lawful good), Ring of Fire Resistance,
     Shield +1, 4 Clerical Scrolls (Restoration, Restoration)
19 - Ring of Protection +2
21 - Wand of Magic Missiles (33 charges), Shield +1,
     5 Clerical Scrolls (Restoration, Restoration)

Stojanow Gate
7 - Ring of Protection +2

Valjevo Castle
10 - Mace +3, Plate Mail +1, Necklace of Missiles (6 charges)
11 - 2 Long Swords +3 (lawful evil)
14 - Long Sword +2 Flame Tongue
18 - Potion of Speed

Valjevo Castle Hedge Maze
1 - Bracers AC 3, Ring of Fire Resistance, Wand of Lightning (20 charges)
5 - Long Sword +5, Ring of Protection +3, Gauntlets of Ogre Power

Valjevo Castle Inner Tower
4 - Wand of Lightning (56 charges)
6 - 12 Two-Handed Swords +2, 12 Plate Mails +2, 12 Rings of Protection +3


SECTION 10.1 - Notes on Creature Statistics
-------------------------------------------

Many monsters capable of using equipment can equip or remove weapons, shields,
and sometimes even armor on the fly.  Their actual statistics in combat may not
reflect the details in the next section, especially if you surprise them before
they can ready equipment.  It is assumed that enemies with both melee and
ranged weaponry are using the former.

THAC0, damage and AC are adjusted for monsters according to equipment; these
statistics (for melee) are shown below.  THAC0 is not recalculated for
Strength or Dexterity.  Armor supersedes base AC, but only if it is better.

No other attributes are adjusted; a humanoid with a Ring of Fire Resistance
does not actually resist fire, movement is not affected by armor, and fighter-
types do not get number of attacks recalculated.

A "Larger or larger" monster may be so in two ways: by being declared that way,
or by having an icon of more than one tile.  Either way, large monster weapon
damage applies to it.
* The note (small icon) indicates it has a one-tile icon.
* The note (reversed) indicates it is declared small/medium in the game files.

Hit dice are important to many spell effects, though the Gold Box games do not
bother to track partial hit dice as the tabletop game does.  Every 4 fractional
hit dice are generally converted to a single whole hit die.

Hostile monster base statistics are used as follows:
  Strength - affects melee weapon damage (but not unarmed attacks)
  Intelligence - affects decision to flee or surrender
  Wisdom - no effect
  Dexterity - affects initiative and AC
  Constitution - no effect
  Charisma - no effect

Monsters #9 and #82 never appear anywhere.

SECTION 10.2 - Detailed Bestiary
--------------------------------

#000 KOBOLD          Lawful Evil Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :   0
Hit Points:   3  Movement:   6   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence  6      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 16
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            17
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     18
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  20
Charisma     10      Spell                          19
THAC0:  21  Armor Class: 7 (from behind: 9)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6 damage
Money carried: 16 copper
Items carried: Short Sword
Experience for defeating: 5 + 1 per hit point (8)

#001 KOBOLD LEADER   Lawful Evil Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :   0
Hit Points:   4  Movement:   6   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            15
Dexterity    12      Petrification or Polymorph     16
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  17
Charisma     10      Spell                          17
THAC0:  19  Armor Class: 6 (from behind: 9)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6 damage
Money carried: 32 copper; 2 silver
Items carried: Short Bow; Arrow (20); Short Sword; Shield; Studded Leather
  Armor
Experience for defeating: 8 + 2 per hit point (16)

#002 GOBLIN GUARD    Lawful Evil Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :   0
Hit Points:   4  Movement:   6   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            15
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     16
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  17
Charisma     10      Spell                          17
THAC0:  19  Armor Class: 6 (from behind: 9)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6 damage
Money carried: 18 silver
Items carried: Short Sword; Shield; Studded Leather Armor
Experience for defeating: 10 + 1 per hit point (14)

#003 GOBLIN LEADER   Lawful Evil Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :   0
Hit Points:   7  Movement:   6   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            15
Dexterity    12      Petrification or Polymorph     16
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  17
Charisma     10      Spell                          17
THAC0:  19  Armor Class: 4 (from behind: 7)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6 damage
Money carried: 24 silver
Items carried: Arrow (20); Long Bow; Short Sword; Shield; Scale Mail
Experience for defeating: 10 + 1 per hit point (17) + 1 for money (18)

#004 ORC             Lawful Evil Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :   1  Character Levels    : Fighter 1
Hit Points:   5  Movement:   9   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence  6      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            15
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     16
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  17
Charisma     10      Spell                          17
THAC0:  19  Armor Class: 6 (from behind: 8)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d8 damage
Money carried: 24 silver
Experience for defeating: 10 + 1 per hit point (15) + 1 for money (16)

#005 ORC LEADER      Lawful Evil Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :   1  Character Levels    : Fighter 1
Hit Points:   8  Movement:   6   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            15
Dexterity    12      Petrification or Polymorph     16
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  17
Charisma     10      Spell                          17
THAC0:  16  Armor Class: 5 (from behind: 7)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d8 damage
Money carried: 4 silver; 20 electrum
Items carried: Battle Axe; Chain Mail; Arrow (7); Long Bow
Experience for defeating: 28 + 2 per hit point (44) + 10 for money (54)

#006 HOBGOBLIN       Lawful Evil Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :   2  Character Levels    : Fighter 2
Hit Points:   6  Movement:   9   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            15
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     16
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  17
Charisma     10      Spell                          17
THAC0:  18  Armor Class: 5 (from behind: 7)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d8 damage
Money carried: 18 copper; 7 gold
Items carried: Long Sword
Experience for defeating: 20 + 2 per hit point (32) + 7 for money (39)

#007 HOBGOBLIN LDR   Lawful Evil Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :   2  Character Levels    : Fighter 2
Hit Points:   6  Movement:   9   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            15
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     16
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  17
Charisma     10      Spell                          17
THAC0:  18  Armor Class: 5 (from behind: 7)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d8 damage
Money carried: 18 copper; 7 gold
Items carried: Long Sword; Arrow (12); Long Bow
Experience for defeating: 20 + 2 per hit point (32) + 7 for money (39)

#008 OGRE            Chaotic Evil Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :   5  Character Levels    : Fighter 5
Hit Points:  21  Movement:   9   Size: Large or larger
Strength     18      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence  6      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 11
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            12
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     13
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  13
Charisma     10      Spell                          14
THAC0:  15  Armor Class: 5 (from behind: 7)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d10 damage
Money carried: 5 gold
Experience for defeating: 90 + 5 per hit point (195) + 5 for money (200)

#009 OGRE LEADER     Chaotic Evil Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :   7  Character Levels    : Fighter 7
Hit Points:  32  Movement:   9   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     18      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 10
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            11
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     12
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  12
Charisma     10      Spell                          13
THAC0:   3  Armor Class: 3 (from behind: 5)
Physical attack: 1 for 2d6 damage
Money carried: 7 gold
Items carried: Arrow (15); Long Bow
Experience for defeating: 225 + 8 per hit point (481) + 7 for money (488)
Footnote: This monster does not actually appear anywhere.

#010 QUICKLINGS      Chaotic Evil Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :   1  Character Levels    : Cleric 1; Fighter 1
Hit Points:   7  Movement:  96   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death  2
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand             5
Dexterity    18      Petrification or Polymorph      6
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                   8
Charisma     10      Spell                           7
THAC0:  18  Armor Class: -3 (from behind: 3)
Physical attack: 3 for 1d4 damage
Money carried: 2 copper; 3 silver; 1 electrum; 2 gems
Experience for defeating: 200 + 3 per hit point (221) + 500 for money (721)
Footnote: Saving throws are as a 19th level cleric.

#011 KOBOLD LEADER   Lawful Evil Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :   0
Hit Points:   4  Movement:   6   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            15
Dexterity    12      Petrification or Polymorph     16
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  17
Charisma     10      Spell                          17
THAC0:  19  Armor Class: 6 (from behind: 9)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6 damage
Money carried: 32 copper; 2 silver
Items carried: Bracers AC 6; Short Sword; Shield; Studded Leather Armor
Experience for defeating: 8 + 2 per hit point (16) + 1600 for items (1616)

#012 GOBLIN LEADER   Lawful Evil Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :   0
Hit Points:   7  Movement:   6   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            15
Dexterity    12      Petrification or Polymorph     16
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  17
Charisma     10      Spell                          17
THAC0:  19  Armor Class: 4 (from behind: 7)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6 damage
Money carried: 24 silver
Items carried: Short Sword; Shield; Leather Armor +1
Experience for defeating: 10 + 1 per hit point (17) + 1 for money (18) + 400
  for items (418)

#013 ORC             Lawful Evil Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :   1  Character Levels    : Fighter 1
Hit Points:   5  Movement:   9   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence  6      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            15
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     16
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  17
Charisma     10      Spell                          17
THAC0:  19  Armor Class: 6 (from behind: 8)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d8 damage
Money carried: 24 silver
Items carried: Clerical Scroll (Cure Light Wounds, Cure Light Wounds)
Experience for defeating: 10 + 1 per hit point (15) + 1 for money (16) + 400
  for items (416)

#014 ORC LEADER      Lawful Evil Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :   1  Character Levels    : Fighter 1
Hit Points:   8  Movement:   6   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            15
Dexterity    12      Petrification or Polymorph     16
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  17
Charisma     10      Spell                          17
THAC0:  15  Armor Class: 5 (from behind: 7)
Physical attack: 1 for 2d4+1 damage
Money carried: 4 silver; 20 electrum
Items carried: Broad Sword +1; Chain Mail; Arrow (7); Long Bow
Experience for defeating: 28 + 2 per hit point (44) + 10 for money (54) + 400
  for items (454)

#015 ORC LEADER      Lawful Evil Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :   1  Character Levels    : Fighter 1
Hit Points:   8  Movement:   6   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            15
Dexterity    12      Petrification or Polymorph     16
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  17
Charisma     10      Spell                          17
THAC0:  15  Armor Class: 4 (from behind: 6)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6+2 damage
Money carried: 4 silver; 20 electrum
Items carried: Flail +1; Chain Mail +1; Arrow (7); Long Bow
Experience for defeating: 28 + 2 per hit point (44) + 10 for money (54) + 800
  for items (854)

#017 SPECTRE         Lawful Evil Undead Human Fighter
Clerics turn using this line on table: Spectre
Hit Dice  :   8  Character Levels    : Fighter 8
Hit Points:  38  Movement:  30   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 10
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            11
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     12
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  12
Charisma     10      Spell                          13
THAC0:  12  Armor Class: 2 (from behind: 4)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d8 damage
Special Abilities: immunity to paralysis (only hold spells and wand);
  vulnerability to holy water; immunity to poison; immunity to sleep and charm
  spells; immunity to cold; level-draining melee attack (2 levels); immunity to
  non-magical weapons
Experience for defeating: 1650 + 10 per hit point (2030)

#018 LARGE SCORPION  True Neutral Snake Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :   3  Character Levels    : Fighter 3
Hit Points:  10  Movement:   9   Size: Large or larger (reversed)
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence  3      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 13
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            14
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     15
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  16
Charisma     10      Spell                          16
THAC0:  15  Armor Class: 5 (from behind: 7)
Primary physical attack: 2 for 1d4 damage
Secondary physical attack: 1 for 1d1 damage
Special Abilities: save vs. poison at a +2 bonus on melee hit or die
Experience for defeating: 35 + 3 per hit point (65)

#019 FERRAN MARTINEZ Lawful Good Undead Human Fighter
Clerics turn using this line on table: Spectre
Hit Dice  :   8  Character Levels    : Fighter 8
Hit Points:  38  Movement:  30   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 10
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            11
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     12
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  12
Charisma     10      Spell                          13
THAC0:  12  Armor Class: 2 (from behind: 4)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d8 damage
Special Abilities: immunity to paralysis (only hold spells and wand); immunity
  to poison; immunity to sleep and charm spells; immunity to cold;
  level-draining melee attack (2 levels); immunity to non-magical weapons
Experience for defeating: 1650 + 10 per hit point (2030)

#020 WIGHT           Lawful Evil Undead Monster Fighter
Clerics turn using this line on table: Wight
Hit Dice  :   5  Character Levels    : Fighter 5
Hit Points:  23  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 11
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            12
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     13
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  13
Charisma     10      Spell                          14
THAC0:  15  Armor Class: 5 (from behind: 7)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d4 damage
Special Abilities: immunity to weapons that aren't either silver or magical;
  immunity to paralysis (only hold spells and wand); immunity to poison;
  immunity to cold; immunity to sleep and charm spells; level-draining melee
  attack (1 level); vulnerability to holy water
Experience for defeating: 540 + 5 per hit point (655)

#021 WRAITH          Lawful Evil Undead Monster Fighter
Clerics turn using this line on table: Wraith
Hit Dice  :   6  Character Levels    : Fighter 6
Hit Points:  24  Movement:  24   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 11
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            12
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     13
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  13
Charisma     10      Spell                          14
THAC0:  15  Armor Class: 4 (from behind: 6)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6 damage
Special Abilities: level-draining melee attack (1 level); immunity to poison;
  immunity to paralysis (only hold spells and wand); immunity to sleep and
  charm spells; immunity to cold; half damage from silver weapons; immunity to
  non-magical/silver weapons; vulnerability to holy water
Experience for defeating: 575 + 6 per hit point (719)

#022 GIANT SKELETON  True Neutral Undead Monster Fighter
Clerics turn using this line on table: Mummy
Hit Dice  :   5  Character Levels    : Fighter 5
Hit Points:  28  Movement:  12   Size: Large or larger
Strength     19      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 11
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            12
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     13
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  13
Charisma     10      Spell                          14
THAC0:  15  Armor Class: 2 (from behind: 4)
Physical attack: 1 for 4d6 damage
Special Abilities: vulnerability to holy water; immunity to cold; immunity to
  sleep, charm, paralysis, and poison; half damage from piercing and slashing
  weapons
Items carried: Short Bow
Experience for defeating: 130 + 5 per hit point (270)

#023 VAMPIRE         Chaotic Evil Undead Monster Fighter
Clerics turn using this line on table: Vampire
Hit Dice  :   9  Character Levels    : Fighter 9
Hit Points:  43  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     18(76)  Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death  8
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand             9
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     10
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                   9
Charisma     10      Spell                          11
THAC0:  14  Armor Class: 1 (from behind: 3)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6+4 damage
Special Abilities: charming gaze (free Charm Person every round; -2 penalty to
  save); half damage from cold; vulnerability to holy water; half damage from
  electricity; immunity to gaze attacks; immunity to sleep, charm, paralysis,
  and poison; immunity to non-magical weapons; regenerate 3 hit points per
  round; level-draining melee attack (2 levels)
Items carried: Short Bow
Experience for defeating: 3800 + 12 per hit point (4316)

#024 LEVEL 6 MU      True Neutral Human Magic-User
Hit Dice  :   6  Character Levels    : Magic-User 6
Hit Points:  23  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 15      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 13
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            11
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph      9
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  13
Charisma     10      Spell                          10
THAC0:  19  Armor Class: 7 (from behind: 9)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d4+2 damage
Spells memorized: M1 Magic Missile (2); M1 Sleep (2); M2 Mirror Image; M2
  Stinking Cloud; M3 Fireball (2)
Money carried: 20 copper; 15 silver
Items carried: Ring of Protection +2
Experience for defeating: 150 + 6 per hit point (288) + 800 for items (1088)

#025 MAD MAN         True Neutral Human Fighter
Hit Dice  :   1  Character Levels    : Fighter 1
Hit Points:   7  Movement:   9   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     17      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            15
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     16
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  17
Charisma     10      Spell                          17
THAC0:  19  Armor Class: 4 (from behind: 6)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6+1 damage
Money carried: 2 silver
Experience for defeating: 10 + 1 per hit point (17)

#026 BASILISK        True Neutral Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :   7  Character Levels    : Fighter 7
Hit Points:  31  Movement:   6   Size: Large or larger (reversed)
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence  3      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 10
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            11
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     12
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  12
Charisma     10      Spell                          13
THAC0:  13  Armor Class: 4 (from behind: 6)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d10 damage
Special Abilities: reflectable gaze; petrifying gaze (save vs. petrification or
  be turned to stone)
Experience for defeating: 1000 + 8 per hit point (1248)

#027 SKULLCRUSHER    Chaotic Neutral Human Fighter
Hit Dice  :   4  Character Levels    : Fighter 4
Hit Points:  39  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     18(81)  Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 13
Wisdom        8      Rod, Staff, or Wand            14
Dexterity    16      Petrification or Polymorph     15
Constitution 18      Breath Weapon                  16
Charisma     12      Spell                          16
THAC0:  15  Armor Class: 8 (from behind: 12)
Physical attack: 1 for 2d1+6 damage
Experience for defeating: 60 + 4 per hit point (216)

#028 GRISHNAK        Chaotic Evil Monster Cleric/Magic-User
Hit Dice  :   6  Character Levels    : Cleric 6; Magic-User 6
Hit Points:  24  Movement:   9   Size: Small/Medium
Strength      9      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 16      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death  9
Wisdom       16      Rod, Staff, or Wand            12
Dexterity    13      Petrification or Polymorph     11
Constitution 11      Breath Weapon                  15
Charisma      5      Spell                          12
THAC0:  13  Armor Class: 5 (from behind: 7)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d4 damage
Spells memorized: C1 Curse; C1 Cure Light Wounds (2); C1 Cause Light Wounds; C1
  Protection from Good; C2 Hold Person (4); C2 Silence, 15' Radius; C3 Cause
  Disease; C3 Bestow Curse
Experience for defeating: 275 + 6 per hit point (419)

#029 JUJU ZOMBIE     True Neutral Undead Monster Fighter
Clerics turn using this line on table: Spectre
Hit Dice  :   4  Character Levels    : Fighter 4

Hit Points:  24  Movement:   9   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 13
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            14
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     15
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  16
Charisma     10      Spell                          16
THAC0:  13  Armor Class: 6 (from behind: 8)
Physical attack: 1 for 3d4 damage
Special Abilities: immunity to non-magical weapons; half damage from blunt and
  piercing weapons; half damage from fire; immunity to electricity; immunity to
  cold; vulnerability to holy water; immunity to sleep, charm, paralysis, and
  poison
Thief skills: Climb Walls 90%
Items carried: Short Bow
Experience for defeating: 110 + 4 per hit point (206)

#031 TROLL           Chaotic Evil Regenerating Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :   7  Character Levels    : Fighter 7
Hit Points:  36  Movement:  12   Size: Large or larger
Strength     19      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 10
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            11
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     12
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  12
Charisma     10      Spell                          13
THAC0:  13  Armor Class: 4 (from behind: 6)
Primary physical attack: 2 for 1d4+4 damage
Secondary physical attack: 1 for 2d6 damage
Special Abilities: inflicting fire and acid damage is supposed to stop
  regeneration; regenerate 3 hit points per round; able to return from death in
  3d6 rounds
Experience for defeating: 525 + 8 per hit point (813)
Differences from tabletop: fire damage preventing regeneration does not work

#032 NORRIS THE GRAY Neutral Evil Half-Orc Fighter
Hit Dice  :   5  Character Levels    : Fighter 5
Hit Points:  25  Movement:   9   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     17      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 11
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            12
Dexterity    17      Petrification or Polymorph     13
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  13
Charisma     10      Spell                          14
THAC0:  14  Armor Class: 1 (from behind: 7)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d8+2 damage
Items carried: Long Sword +1; Shield; Chain Mail
Experience for defeating: 215 + 400 for items (615)

#033 MACE            Lawful Evil Half-Orc Cleric
Hit Dice  :   5  Character Levels    : Cleric 5
Hit Points:  25  Movement:   9   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     17      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death  9
Wisdom       17      Rod, Staff, or Wand            12
Dexterity    17      Petrification or Polymorph     13
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  15
Charisma     10      Spell                          14
THAC0:  17  Armor Class: 1 (from behind: 7)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6+3 damage
Spells memorized: C1 Bless (2); C1 Curse; C1 Cause Light Wounds (2); C2 Hold
  Person (5); C3 Animate Dead; C3 Prayer
Items carried: Mace +1; Shield; Chain Mail
Experience for defeating: 215 + 400 for items (615)

#034 SKELETON        True Neutral Undead Monster Fighter
Clerics turn using this line on table: Skeleton
Hit Dice  :   1  Character Levels    : Fighter 1
Hit Points:   5  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            15
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     16
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  17
Charisma     10      Spell                          17
THAC0:  19  Armor Class: 7 (from behind: 9)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6 damage
Special Abilities: vulnerability to holy water; immunity to cold; immunity to
  sleep, charm, paralysis, and poison; half damage from piercing and slashing
  weapons
Experience for defeating: 14 + 1 per hit point (19)

#035 ZOMBIE          True Neutral Undead Monster Fighter
Clerics turn using this line on table: Zombie
Hit Dice  :   2  Character Levels    : Fighter 2
Hit Points:  10  Movement:   6   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            15
Dexterity     0      Petrification or Polymorph     16
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  17
Charisma     10      Spell                          17
THAC0:  16  Armor Class: 8 (from behind: 10)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d8 damage
Special Abilities: immunity to cold; vulnerability to holy water; immunity to
  sleep, charm, paralysis, and poison
Experience for defeating: 20 + 2 per hit point (40)

#036 SWORDSMAN       Lawful Evil Human Fighter
Hit Dice  :   3  Character Levels    : Fighter 3
Hit Points:  18  Movement:   9   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     16      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 14      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 13
Wisdom       14      Rod, Staff, or Wand            14
Dexterity    14      Petrification or Polymorph     15
Constitution 14      Breath Weapon                  16
Charisma     10      Spell                          16
THAC0:  18  Armor Class: 5 (from behind: 7)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d8+1 damage
Money carried: 5 silver
Items carried: Arrow (20); Long Bow; Chain Mail; Long Sword
Experience for defeating: 35 + 3 per hit point (89)

#038 POISONOUS FROG  True Neutral Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :   1  Character Levels    : Fighter 1
Hit Points:   4  Movement:   9   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence  3      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            15
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     16
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  17
Charisma     10      Spell                          17
THAC0:  19  Armor Class: 8 (from behind: 10)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d1 damage
Special Abilities: save vs. poison at a +4 bonus on melee hit or die
Experience for defeating: 35 + 1 per hit point (39)

#039 HUGE SCORPION   True Neutral Snake Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :   5  Character Levels    : Fighter 5
Hit Points:  20  Movement:  12   Size: Large or larger (reversed)
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence  3      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 11
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            12
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     13
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  13
Charisma     10      Spell                          14
THAC0:  15  Armor Class: 4 (from behind: 6)
Primary physical attack: 2 for 1d8 damage
Secondary physical attack: 1 for 1d3 damage
Special Abilities: save vs. poison on melee hit or die
Experience for defeating: 90 + 5 per hit point (190)

#040 NOMAD           True Neutral Human Fighter
Hit Dice  :   1  Character Levels    : Fighter 1
Hit Points:   6  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            15
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     16
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  17
Charisma     10      Spell                          17
THAC0:  19  Armor Class: 5 (from behind: 8)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6 damage
Money carried: 15 copper
Items carried: Arrow (20); Long Bow; Short Sword; Shield; Leather Armor
Experience for defeating: 10 + 1 per hit point (16)

#041 4TH LVL FIGHTER Lawful Evil Human Fighter
Hit Dice  :   4  Character Levels    : Fighter 4
Hit Points:  30  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     17      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 14      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 13
Wisdom       14      Rod, Staff, or Wand            14
Dexterity    14      Petrification or Polymorph     15
Constitution 17      Breath Weapon                  16
Charisma     10      Spell                          16
THAC0:  17  Armor Class: 3 (from behind: 6)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d8+2 damage
Money carried: 3 electrum
Items carried: Shield; Chain Mail +1; Long Sword +1
Experience for defeating: 60 + 4 per hit point (180) + 1 for money (181) + 800
  for items (981)

#042 HASSAD          True Neutral Human Fighter
Hit Dice  :   6  Character Levels    : Fighter 6
Hit Points:  45  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     17      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 12      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 11
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            12
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     13
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  13
Charisma     14      Spell                          14
THAC0:  11  Armor Class: 0 (from behind: 4)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d8+3 damage
Money carried: 15 copper
Items carried: Long Sword +2; Shield +1; Scale Mail +2
Experience for defeating: 150 + 6 per hit point (420) + 2000 for items (2420)

#043 SHAMAN          True Neutral Human Magic-User
Hit Dice  :   5  Character Levels    : Magic-User 5
Hit Points:  20  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 15      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            13
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     11
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  15
Charisma     10      Spell                          12
THAC0:  18  Armor Class: 4 (from behind: 6)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d4+2 damage
Spells memorized: M1 Magic Missile (2); M1 Sleep (2); M2 Mirror Image; M2
  Stinking Cloud; M3 Fireball
Money carried: 20 copper
Items carried: Wand of Magic Missiles (50 charges); Bracers AC 2; Dagger +2
Experience for defeating: 90 + 5 per hit point (190) + 3600 for items (3790)

#044 ORC             Lawful Evil Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :   1  Character Levels    : Fighter 1
Hit Points:   5  Movement:   6   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            15
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     16
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  17
Charisma     10      Spell                          17
THAC0:  19  Armor Class: 6 (from behind: 8)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d8 damage
Money carried: 12 electrum
Items carried: Arrow (30); Short Bow
Experience for defeating: 10 + 1 per hit point (15) + 6 for money (21)

#045 1ST LVL THIEF   Chaotic Neutral Human Thief
Hit Dice  :   1  Character Levels    : Thief 1
Hit Points:   4  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 13
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            12
Dexterity    18      Petrification or Polymorph     14
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  16
Charisma     10      Spell                          15
THAC0:  20  Armor Class: 4 (from behind: 10)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d8 damage
Thief skills: Pick Pocket 40%; Open Locks 40%; Find/Remove Traps 25%; Move
  Silently 25%; Hide in Shadows 20%; Hear Noise 10%; Climb Walls 85%
Money carried: 5 silver
Items carried: Leather Armor; Long Sword
Experience for defeating: 10 + 1 per hit point (14)

#048 DWARVEN FIGHTER Lawful Evil Dwarf Cleric
Hit Dice  :   6  Character Levels    : Fighter 6
Hit Points:  50  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     18(91)  Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 14      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 11
Wisdom       14      Rod, Staff, or Wand            12
Dexterity    14      Petrification or Polymorph     13
Constitution 14      Breath Weapon                  13
Charisma     10      Spell                          14
THAC0:  15  Armor Class: 4 (from behind: 6)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d8+6 damage
Money carried: 15 gold
Items carried: Gauntlets of Ogre Power; Chain Mail +1; Long Sword +1
Experience for defeating: 150 + 6 per hit point (450) + 15 for money (465) +
  2000 for items (2465)

#049 MEDUSA          Lawful Evil Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :   6  Character Levels    : Fighter 6
Hit Points:  30  Movement:   9   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 11
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            12
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     13
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  13
Charisma     10      Spell                          14
THAC0:  13  Armor Class: 5 (from behind: 7)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d4 damage
Special Abilities: save vs. poison on melee hit or die; reflectable gaze;
  petrifying gaze (save vs. petrification or be turned to stone)
Experience for defeating: 725 + 6 per hit point (905)

#050 COMMANDANT      Lawful Evil Human Fighter
Hit Dice  :   9  Character Levels    : Fighter 9
Hit Points: 100  Movement:   9   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     18(51)  Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death  8
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand             9
Dexterity    16      Petrification or Polymorph     10
Constitution 17      Breath Weapon                   9
Charisma     14      Spell                          11
THAC0:  10  Armor Class: -3 (from behind: 3)
Physical attack: 1.5 for 1d8+5 damage
Money carried: 18 gold; 6 platinum
Items carried: Potion of Extra Healing (3); Ring of Fire Resistance; Shield +1;
  Plate Mail +2; Javelin of Lightning; Long Sword +2
Experience for defeating: 600 + 12 per hit point (1800) + 48 for money (1848) +
  4000 for items (5848)

#051 6TH LVL THIEF   Chaotic Neutral Human Thief
Hit Dice  :   7  Character Levels    : Thief 7
Hit Points:  28  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 12
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            11
Dexterity    18      Petrification or Polymorph     12
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  15
Charisma     10      Spell                          13
THAC0:  19  Armor Class: 4 (from behind: 10)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d8 damage
Thief skills: Pick Pocket 70%; Open Locks 67%; Find/Remove Traps 55%; Move
  Silently 65%; Hide in Shadows 53%; Hear Noise 25%; Climb Walls 94%
Money carried: 6 gold
Items carried: Leather Armor; Long Sword
Experience for defeating: 225 + 8 per hit point (449) + 6 for money (455)

#053 AIDES           Lawful Evil Human Fighter
Hit Dice  :   3  Character Levels    : Fighter 3
Hit Points:  18  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     16      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 14      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 13
Wisdom       14      Rod, Staff, or Wand            14
Dexterity    14      Petrification or Polymorph     15
Constitution 14      Breath Weapon                  16
Charisma     10      Spell                          16
THAC0:  18  Armor Class: 5 (from behind: 7)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d8+1 damage
Money carried: 5 silver
Items carried: Arrow (20); Long Bow; Chain Mail; Long Sword
Experience for defeating: 35 + 3 per hit point (89)

#054 CORPORAL        Lawful Evil Human Fighter
Hit Dice  :   2  Character Levels    : Fighter 2
Hit Points:  13  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     16      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 14      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       14      Rod, Staff, or Wand            15
Dexterity    14      Petrification or Polymorph     16
Constitution 14      Breath Weapon                  17
Charisma     10      Spell                          17
THAC0:  20  Armor Class: 6 (from behind: 8)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d8 damage
Money carried: 1 silver
Experience for defeating: 20 + 2 per hit point (46)

#055 HILL GIANT      Chaotic Evil Giant Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :   9  Character Levels    : Fighter 9
Hit Points:  41  Movement:  12   Size: Large or larger
Strength     19      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death  8
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand             9
Dexterity     0      Petrification or Polymorph     10
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                   9
Charisma     10      Spell                          11
THAC0:  12  Armor Class: 4 (from behind: 6)
Physical attack: 1 for 2d8 damage
Special Abilities: boulder evasion (50% chance of avoiding thrown boulders)
Money carried: 2 copper; 4 silver; 3 electrum; 2000 gold
Items carried: Boulder; Boulder
Experience for defeating: 1400 + 12 per hit point (1892) + 2001 for money
  (3893)
Footnote: Boulders may be thrown for 1d8+8 damage.

#056 FIRE GIANT      Lawful Evil Giant Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :  12  Character Levels    : Fighter 12
Hit Points:  59  Movement:  12   Size: Large or larger
Strength     22      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death  7
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand             8
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph      9
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                   8
Charisma     10      Spell                          10
THAC0:   9  Armor Class: 3 (from behind: 5)
Physical attack: 1 for 5d6 damage
Special Abilities: boulder evasion (50% chance of avoiding thrown boulders);
  immunity to fire
Money carried: 2000 copper; 1000 silver; 4000 gold
Experience for defeating: 2700 + 16 per hit point (3644) + 4060 for money
  (7704)

#057 LIZARDMAN       True Neutral Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :   3  Character Levels    : Fighter 3
Hit Points:  11  Movement:   6   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence  3      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 13
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            14
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     15
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  16
Charisma     10      Spell                          16
THAC0:  16  Armor Class: 4 (from behind: 6)
Primary physical attack: 1 for 1d8 damage
Secondary physical attack: 2 for 1d2 damage
Experience for defeating: 65 + 3 per hit point (98)

#058 MUTANT LIZ-MAN  True Neutral Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :   4  Character Levels    : Fighter 4
Hit Points:  18  Movement:   6   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 13
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            14
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     15
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  16
Charisma     10      Spell                          16
THAC0:  14  Armor Class: 3 (from behind: 5)
Primary physical attack: 1 for 1d10 damage
Secondary physical attack: 2 for 1d4 damage
Experience for defeating: 60 + 4 per hit point (132)

#059 GIANT LIZARD    True Neutral Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :   4  Character Levels    : Fighter 4
Hit Points:  16  Movement:  15   Size: Large or larger
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence  3      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 13
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            14
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     15
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  16
Charisma     10      Spell                          16
THAC0:  16  Armor Class: 5 (from behind: 7)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d8 damage
Experience for defeating: 60 + 4 per hit point (124)

#060 GIANT SNAKE     True Neutral Snake Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :   5  Character Levels    : Fighter 5
Hit Points:  25  Movement:  12   Size: Large or larger
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence  3      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 11
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            12
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     13
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  13
Charisma     10      Spell                          14
THAC0:  15  Armor Class: 5 (from behind: 7)
Physical attack: 1 for 3d6+2 damage
Special Abilities: save vs. poison on melee hit or die
Experience for defeating: 135 + 5 per hit point (260)

#061 STIRGE          True Neutral Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :   2  Character Levels    : Fighter 2
Hit Points:   5  Movement:  18   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence  3      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            15
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     16
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  17
Charisma     10      Spell                          17
THAC0:  15  Armor Class: 8 (from behind: 10)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d3 damage
Special Abilities: blood draining attack (1d4 damage per round after melee hit,
  12 damage maximum)
Experience for defeating: 36 + 2 per hit point (46)

#062 MINOTAUR        Chaotic Evil Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :   7  Character Levels    : Fighter 7
Hit Points:  33  Movement:  12   Size: Large or larger
Strength     18(50)  Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 11
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            12
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     13
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  13
Charisma     10      Spell                          14
THAC0:  13  Armor Class: 6 (from behind: 8)
Primary physical attack: 1 for 1d3 damage
Secondary physical attack: 1 for 2d4 damage
Experience for defeating: 400 + 8 per hit point (664)

#063 BUGBEAR         Chaotic Evil Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :   4  Character Levels    : Fighter 4
Hit Points:  16  Movement:   9   Size: Large or larger (small icon)
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 13
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            14
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     15
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  16
Charisma     10      Spell                          16
THAC0:  16  Armor Class: 5 (from behind: 7)
Physical attack: 1 for 2d4 damage
Money carried: 24 copper; 18 silver
Experience for defeating: 135 + 4 per hit point (199) + 1 for money (200)

#065 AHNKHEG         True Neutral Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :   8  Character Levels    : Fighter 8
Hit Points:  40  Movement:  12   Size: Large or larger
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence  3      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 10
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            11
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     12
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  12
Charisma     10      Spell                          13
THAC0:  12  Armor Class: 2 (from behind: 4)
Physical attack: 1 for 3d6 damage
Special Abilities: 1d4 additional acid damage on melee hit; acid squirt attack
  (range 3, 8d4 damage, save vs. breath weapon for half damage)
Experience for defeating: 390 + 1 per hit point (430)

#066 TYRANITHRAXUS   Lawful Good Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :  10  Character Levels    : Fighter 10
Hit Points:  80  Movement:  24   Size: Large or larger
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death  7
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand             8
Dexterity    19      Petrification or Polymorph      9
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                   8
Charisma     10      Spell                          10
THAC0:   5  Armor Class: -4 (from behind: 2)
Primary physical attack: 2 for 1d6 damage
Secondary physical attack: 1 for 4d6 damage
Special Abilities: see invisibility; 100% magic resistance; 2d10 additional
  fire damage on melee hit; dragon fear aura (opponents with 3 or fewer HD must
  save vs. magic or be paralyzed for 4d6 turns); displaced (first melee attack
  always misses); dragon electrical attack (range 10, 100% chance in first
  round, 50% chance thereafter, area of effect as lightning bolt, max HP
  damage, save vs. breath weapon for half damage)
Experience for defeating: 2550 + 14 per hit point (3670)
Differences from tabletop: lacks repulsion breath

#067 CENTAUR         Chaotic Good Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :   4  Character Levels    : Fighter 4
Hit Points:  20  Movement:  18   Size: Large or larger
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 11
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            12
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     13
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  13
Charisma     10      Spell                          14
THAC0:  15  Armor Class: 5 (from behind: 7)
Physical attack: 2 for 1d6 damage
Money carried: 6 gold; 2 gems
Experience for defeating: 85 + 4 per hit point (165) + 506 for money (671)

#068 DISPLACER BEAST Lawful Good Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :   6  Character Levels    : Fighter 6
Hit Points:  30  Movement:  15   Size: Large or larger
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence  3      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death  9
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            10
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     11
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  11
Charisma     10      Spell                          12
THAC0:  13  Armor Class: 2 (from behind: 4)
Physical attack: 2 for 2d4 damage
Experience for defeating: 475 + 8 per hit point (715)
Differences from tabletop: not displaced

#069 DRIDER          Chaotic Evil Elf Fighter/Magic-User/Thief
Hit Dice  :   7  Character Levels    : Fighter 7; Magic-User 7
Hit Points:  36  Movement:  12   Size: Large or larger
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 13
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            11
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph      9
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  13
Charisma     10      Spell                          10
THAC0:  13  Armor Class: 2 (from behind: 5)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d4 damage
Special Abilities: save vs. paralyzation at a -2 penalty on melee hit or be
  paralyzed for 1d2 turns (10-20 minutes)
Spells memorized: M1 Magic Missile; M1 Sleep (2); M2 Detect Invisibility; M2
  Ray of Enfeeblement; M2 Stinking Cloud; M3 Blink; M3 Fireball (2); M3 Haste
Money carried: 7 platinum; 3 gems
Items carried: Shield; Arrow (4); Composite Long Bow
Experience for defeating: 875 + 8 per hit point (1163) + 785 for money (1948)
Differences from tabletop: lacks 15% magic resistance

#070 EFREETI         True Neutral Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :  10  Character Levels    : Fighter 10
Hit Points:  55  Movement:  24   Size: Large or larger
Strength     19      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death  8
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand             9
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph      9
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                   9
Charisma     10      Spell                          10
THAC0:  10  Armor Class: 2 (from behind: 4)
Physical attack: 1 for 3d8 damage
Special Abilities: efreeti fire resistance (-1 damage per die of fire damage)
Money carried: 6 gold
Experience for defeating: 1950 + 14 per hit point (2720) + 6 for money (2726)
Differences from tabletop: lacks Enlarge and Invisibility spells

#071 ETTIN           Chaotic Evil Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :  10  Character Levels    : Fighter 10
Hit Points:  50  Movement:  12   Size: Large or larger
Strength     19      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death  8
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand             9
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     10
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                   9
Charisma     10      Spell                          11
THAC0:  10  Armor Class: 3 (from behind: 5)
Primary physical attack: 1 for 2d8 damage
Secondary physical attack: 1 for 3d6 damage
Experience for defeating: 1950 + 14 per hit point (2650)

#072 GHOUL           Chaotic Evil Undead Monster Fighter
Clerics turn using this line on table: Ghoul
Hit Dice  :   2  Character Levels    : Fighter 2
Hit Points:  10  Movement:   9   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            15
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     16
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  17
Charisma     10      Spell                          17
THAC0:  16  Armor Class: 6 (from behind: 8)
Primary physical attack: 2 for 1d3 damage
Secondary physical attack: 1 for 1d6 damage
Special Abilities: immunity to sleep and charm spells; save vs. paralyzation on
  melee hit or be paralyzed for 1d6+2 rounds (does not affect elves)
Experience for defeating: 65 + 2 per hit point (85)

#073 GNOLL           Chaotic Evil Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :   2  Character Levels    : Fighter 2
Hit Points:  10  Movement:   9   Size: Large or larger (reversed)
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            15
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     16
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  17
Charisma     10      Spell                          17
THAC0:  16  Armor Class: 5 (from behind: 7)
Physical attack: 1 for 2d4 damage
Money carried: 12 electrum; 8 gold
Experience for defeating: 28 + 2 per hit point (48) + 14 for money (62)
Differences from tabletop: marked as Small/Medium in game files, though still
  has a Large icon

#074 GIANT MANTIS    True Neutral Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :  10  Character Levels    : Fighter 10
Hit Points:  55  Movement:  12   Size: Large or larger
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence  3      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death  8
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand             9
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph      9
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                   9
Charisma     10      Spell                          10
THAC0:  10  Armor Class: 3 (from behind: 5)
Physical attack: 1 for 2d6 damage
Special Abilities: bite and hold attack (attack holds defender in place)
Experience for defeating: 1350 + 14 per hit point (2120)

#075 6TH LVL FIGHTER True Neutral Human Fighter
Hit Dice  :   6  Character Levels    : Fighter 6
Hit Points:  45  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     17      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 12      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 11
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            12
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     13
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  13
Charisma     14      Spell                          14
THAC0:  12  Armor Class: 1 (from behind: 4)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d8+2 damage
Money carried: 15 copper
Items carried: Shield; Plate Armor; Long Sword +1
Experience for defeating: 150 + 6 per hit point (420) + 400 for items (820)

#076 7TH LVL DW FIGH True Neutral Dwarf Fighter
Hit Dice  :   7  Character Levels    : Fighter 7
Hit Points:  50  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     17      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 12      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 10
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            11
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     12
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  12
Charisma     14      Spell                          13
THAC0:  13  Armor Class: 4 (from behind: 6)
Physical attack: 1 for 2d4+2 damage
Money carried: 3 gold
Items carried: Lucern Hammer +1
Experience for defeating: 225 + 8 per hit point (625) + 3 for money (628) + 400
  for items (1028)

#077 7TH LVL THIEF   Chaotic Neutral Human Thief
Hit Dice  :   7  Character Levels    : Thief 7
Hit Points:  28  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 12
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            11
Dexterity    18      Petrification or Polymorph     12
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  15
Charisma     10      Spell                          13
THAC0:  19  Armor Class: 4 (from behind: 10)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6 damage
Thief skills: Pick Pocket 70%; Open Locks 67%; Find/Remove Traps 55%; Move
  Silently 65%; Hide in Shadows 53%; Hear Noise 25%; Climb Walls 94%
Money carried: 6 gold
Items carried: Leather Armor; Wand of Magic Missiles (23 charges)
Experience for defeating: 225 + 8 per hit point (449) + 6 for money (455) +
  4000 for items (4455)

#078 2ND LVL CLERIC  Neutral Good Monster Cleric
Hit Dice  :   2  Character Levels    : Cleric 2
Hit Points:   8  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 10
Wisdom       14      Rod, Staff, or Wand            13
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     14
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  16
Charisma     10      Spell                          15
THAC0:  20  Armor Class: 10 (from behind: 12)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d4 damage
Money carried: 4 silver
Experience for defeating: 20 + 2 per hit point (36)

#079 DIANE           True Neutral Human Magic-User
Hit Dice  :   5  Character Levels    : Magic-User 5
Hit Points:  20  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 15      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            13
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     11
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  15
Charisma     10      Spell                          12
THAC0:  20  Armor Class: 9 (from behind: 11)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d4 damage
Spells memorized: M1 Magic Missile (7)
Money carried: 20 copper
Items carried: Dagger
Experience for defeating: 90 + 5 per hit point (190)

#080 7TH LVL FIGHTER True Neutral Dwarf Fighter
Hit Dice  :   7  Character Levels    : Fighter 7
Hit Points:  50  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     17      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 12      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 10
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            11
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     12
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  12
Charisma     14      Spell                          13
THAC0:  14  Armor Class: 3 (from behind: 5)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d10+1 damage
Money carried: 3 gold
Items carried: Plate Armor; Two-Handed Sword
Experience for defeating: 225 + 8 per hit point (625) + 3 for money (628)

#081 YARASH          Lawful Evil Human Magic-User
Hit Dice  :   9  Character Levels    : Magic-User 9
Hit Points:  27  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 18      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 13
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            11
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph      9
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  13
Charisma     10      Spell                          10
THAC0:  19  Armor Class: 4 (from behind: 6)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d4+2 damage
Spells memorized: M1 Magic Missile (3); M1 Shield; M2 Mirror Image; M2 Stinking
  Cloud (2); M3 Blink; M3 Fireball; M3 Protection from Normal Missiles
Money carried: 8 platinum
Items carried: Potion of Speed; Wand of Paralyzation (23 charges); Potion of
  Healing (2); Bracers AC 4
Experience for defeating: 600 + 12 per hit point (924) + 40 for money (964) +
  4000 for items (4964)

#082 LEVEL 6 MU      True Neutral Human Magic-User
Hit Dice  :   6  Character Levels    : Magic-User 6
Hit Points:  23  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 15      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 13
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            11
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph      9
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  13
Charisma     10      Spell                          10
THAC0:  17  Armor Class: 6 (from behind: 8)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d4+2 damage
Spells memorized: M1 Magic Missile (2); M1 Sleep (2); M2 Mirror Image; M2
  Stinking Cloud; M3 Fireball (2)
Money carried: 20 copper; 15 silver
Items carried: Magic-User Scroll (Fireball, Blink, Blink); Dagger +2; Ring of
  Protection +3; Cloak of Displacement; Wand of Lightning (67 charges)
Experience for defeating: 150 + 6 per hit point (288) + 9600 for items (9888)
Footnote: This monster does not actually appear anywhere.

#083 7TH LVL CLERIC  Lawful Evil Human Cleric
Hit Dice  :   7  Character Levels    : Cleric 7
Hit Points:  42  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     15      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 14      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death  7
Wisdom       18      Rod, Staff, or Wand            10
Dexterity    14      Petrification or Polymorph     11
Constitution 14      Breath Weapon                  13
Charisma     10      Spell                          12
THAC0:  14  Armor Class: 2 (from behind: 4)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6+3 damage
Spells memorized: C1 Curse (4); C2 Hold Person (3); C2 Silence, 15' Radius; C3
  Prayer; C3 Bestow Curse (2)
Money carried: 15 gold
Items carried: Potion of Healing; Banded Armor +2; Mace +2
Experience for defeating: 350 + 8 per hit point (686) + 15 for money (701) +
  2000 for items (2701)

#084 6TH LVL FIGHTER True Neutral Human Fighter
Hit Dice  :   6  Character Levels    : Fighter 6
Hit Points:  45  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     17      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 12      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 11
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            12
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     13
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  13
Charisma     14      Spell                          14
THAC0:  11  Armor Class: 2 (from behind: 4)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d10+3 damage
Money carried: 15 copper
Items carried: Javelin of Lightning; Two-Handed Sword +2; Chain Mail +1
Experience for defeating: 150 + 6 per hit point (420) + 1600 for items (2020)

#085 8TH LVL FIGHTER True Neutral Human Fighter
Hit Dice  :   8  Character Levels    : Fighter 8
Hit Points:  87  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     18(51)  Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 12      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 10
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            11
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     12
Constitution 18      Breath Weapon                  12
Charisma     14      Spell                          13
THAC0:  12  Armor Class: 1 (from behind: 3)
Physical attack: 1.5 for 1d10+5 damage
Money carried: 5 platinum
Items carried: Ring of Protection +3; Two-Handed Sword +2; Plate Mail +2
Experience for defeating: 500 + 10 per hit point (1370) + 25 for money (1395) +
  2800 for items (4195)

#086 AL-HYAM DAZID   Lawful Evil Human Magic-User
Hit Dice  :   7  Character Levels    : Magic-User 7
Hit Points:  22  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 18      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 13
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            11
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph      9
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  13
Charisma     10      Spell                          10
THAC0:  19  Armor Class: 3 (from behind: 5)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d4+2 damage
Spells memorized: M1 Reduce; M1 Magic Missile (2); M1 Shield; M2 Mirror Image;
  M2 Stinking Cloud; M3 Fireball (2)
Money carried: 15 gold
Items carried: Wand of Lightning (20 charges); Ring of Fire Resistance; Bracers
  AC 3
Experience for defeating: 350 + 8 per hit point (526) + 15 for money (541) +
  8000 for items (8541)

#087 ENVOY           True Neutral Human Cleric/Fighter/Magic-User
Hit Dice  :   6  Character Levels    : Fighter 6; Magic-User 6
Hit Points:  45  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     18(51)  Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 18      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 11
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            12
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     11
Constitution 17      Breath Weapon                  13
Charisma     14      Spell                          12
THAC0:  11  Armor Class: 2 (from behind: 4)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d10+5 damage
Spells memorized: M1 Magic Missile (2); M1 Sleep (2); M2 Mirror Image; M2
  Stinking Cloud; M3 Fireball
Money carried: 5 gold
Items carried: Two-Handed Sword +2; Plate
Experience for defeating: 225 + 6 per hit point (495) + 5 for money (500) + 800
  for items (1300)

#088 GENHEERIS       Lawful Evil Human Magic-User
Hit Dice  :   7  Character Levels    : Magic-User 7
Hit Points:  22  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 18      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 13
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            11
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph      9
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  13
Charisma     10      Spell                          10
THAC0:  19  Armor Class: 9 (from behind: 11)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d4+2 damage
Spells known: M1 Burning Hands; M1 Charm Person; M1 Magic Missile; M1 Shield;
  M1 Sleep; M2 Invisibility; M2 Mirror Image; M2 Ray of Enfeeblement; M2
  Stinking Cloud; M3 Fireball; M3 Haste; M3 Lightning Bolt; M3 Protection from
  Normal Missiles
Spells memorized: M1 Magic Missile (3); M1 Sleep; M2 Stinking Cloud (2); M3
  Fireball (2)
Money carried: 15 gold
Items carried: Wand of Lightning (56 charges)
Experience for defeating: 350 + 8 per hit point (526) + 15 for money (541) +
  4000 for items (4541)

#089 5TH LVL MU      True Neutral Human Magic-User
Hit Dice  :   5  Character Levels    : Magic-User 5
Hit Points:  20  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 15      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            13
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     11
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  15
Charisma     10      Spell                          12
THAC0:  20  Armor Class: 9 (from behind: 11)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d4 damage
Spells memorized: M1 Charm Person (2); M1 Magic Missile (2); M2 Mirror Image;
  M2 Stinking Cloud; M3 Hold Person
Money carried: 20 copper
Items carried: Dagger
Experience for defeating: 90 + 5 per hit point (190)

#090 1ST LVL CLERIC  Neutral Good Monster Cleric
Hit Dice  :   1  Character Levels    : Cleric 1
Hit Points:   8  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 10
Wisdom       14      Rod, Staff, or Wand            13
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     14
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  16
Charisma     10      Spell                          15
THAC0:  20  Armor Class: 5 (from behind: 7)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6+1 damage
Spells memorized: C1 Bless; C1 Detect Magic; M1 Reduce
Money carried: 4 silver
Items carried: Mace; Chain Mail
Experience for defeating: 10 + 1 per hit point (18)

#091 LEVEL 5 CLERIC  Neutral Good Monster Cleric
Hit Dice  :   5  Character Levels    : Cleric 5
Hit Points:  29  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     14      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death  9
Wisdom       18      Rod, Staff, or Wand            12
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     13
Constitution 14      Breath Weapon                  15
Charisma     10      Spell                          14
THAC0:  15  Armor Class: 2 (from behind: 4)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6+4 damage
Spells memorized: C1 Bless (2); C1 Cure Light Wounds (3); C2 Hold Person (5);
  C3 Cause Blindness
Money carried: 4 silver
Items carried: Necklace of Missiles (6 charges); Mace +3; Plate Mail +1
Experience for defeating: 130 + 5 per hit point (275) + 2400 for items (2675)

#092 TYRANITHRAXUS   Chaotic Neutral Human Thief
Hit Dice  :   8  Character Levels    : Thief 8
Hit Points:  40  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     17      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 12
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            11
Dexterity    18      Petrification or Polymorph     12
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  15
Charisma     10      Spell                          13
THAC0:  14  Armor Class: 3 (from behind: 9)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d8+6 damage
Thief skills: Pick Pocket 75%; Open Locks 72%; Find/Remove Traps 60%; Move
  Silently 72%; Hide in Shadows 59%; Hear Noise 25%; Climb Walls 96%; Read
  Languages 40%
Money carried: 4 gold
Items carried: Gauntlets of Ogre Power; Ring of Protection +3; Long Sword +5
Experience for defeating: 375 + 8 per hit point (695) + 4 for money (699) +
  4400 for items (5099)

#093 6TH LVL THIEF   Chaotic Neutral Human Thief
Hit Dice  :   7  Character Levels    : Thief 7
Hit Points:  28  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 12
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            11
Dexterity    18      Petrification or Polymorph     12
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  15
Charisma     10      Spell                          13
THAC0:  19  Armor Class: 6 (from behind: 12)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6 damage
Special Abilities: camouflaged (95% effective invisibility)
Thief skills: Pick Pocket 70%; Open Locks 67%; Find/Remove Traps 55%; Move
  Silently 65%; Hide in Shadows 53%; Hear Noise 25%; Climb Walls 94%
Money carried: 6 gold
Experience for defeating: 225 + 8 per hit point (449) + 6 for money (455)

#094 LEVEL 3 MU      True Neutral Human Magic-User
Hit Dice  :   3  Character Levels    : Magic-User 3
Hit Points:   9  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 15      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            13
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     11
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  15
Charisma     10      Spell                          12
THAC0:  20  Armor Class: 9 (from behind: 11)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d4+2 damage
Spells memorized: M1 Magic Missile; M1 Sleep; M2 Stinking Cloud
Money carried: 20 copper
Items carried: Wand of Magic Missiles (67 charges)
Experience for defeating: 50 + 3 per hit point (77) + 4000 for items (4077)

#095 DRYTHH          True Neutral Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :   4  Character Levels    : Fighter 4
Hit Points:  18  Movement:   6   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     18(00)  Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 13
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            14
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     15
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  16
Charisma     10      Spell                          16
THAC0:  14  Armor Class: 3 (from behind: 5)
Primary physical attack: 1 for 1d10 damage
Secondary physical attack: 2 for 1d4 damage
Experience for defeating: 60 + 4 per hit point (132)

#096 GUARD           True Neutral Human Fighter
Hit Dice  :   0
Hit Points:   4  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     16      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 14      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       14      Rod, Staff, or Wand            15
Dexterity    14      Petrification or Polymorph     16
Constitution 14      Breath Weapon                  17
Charisma     10      Spell                          17
THAC0:  20  Armor Class: 8 (from behind: 10)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d8+1 damage
Money carried: 5 copper
Items carried: Long Sword; Leather Armor; Quarrel; Light Crossbow
Experience for defeating: 10 + 1 per hit point (14)

#097 BANDIT          True Neutral Human Fighter
Hit Dice  :   0
Hit Points:   6  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            15
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     16
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  17
Charisma     10      Spell                          17
THAC0:  19  Armor Class: 5 (from behind: 8)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6 damage
Money carried: 15 copper
Items carried: Arrow (20); Long Bow; Short Sword; Shield; Leather Armor
Experience for defeating: 10 + 1 per hit point (16)

#098 MERCHANT        True Neutral Human Fighter
Hit Dice  :   0
Hit Points:   6  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            15
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     16
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  17
Charisma     10      Spell                          17
THAC0:  19  Armor Class: 5 (from behind: 8)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6 damage
Money carried: 15 copper
Items carried: Arrow (20); Long Bow; Short Sword; Shield; Leather Armor
Experience for defeating: 10 + 1 per hit point (16)

#099 BUCCANEER       True Neutral Human Fighter
Hit Dice  :   0
Hit Points:   4  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     16      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 14      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       14      Rod, Staff, or Wand            15
Dexterity    14      Petrification or Polymorph     16
Constitution 14      Breath Weapon                  17
Charisma     10      Spell                          17
THAC0:  20  Armor Class: 10 (from behind: 12)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d8 damage
Money carried: 5 copper
Experience for defeating: 10 + 1 per hit point (14)

#100 3RD LVL FIGHTER Lawful Evil Human Fighter
Hit Dice  :   3  Character Levels    : Fighter 3
Hit Points:  18  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     16      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 14      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 13
Wisdom       14      Rod, Staff, or Wand            14
Dexterity    14      Petrification or Polymorph     15
Constitution 14      Breath Weapon                  16
Charisma     10      Spell                          16
THAC0:  18  Armor Class: 3 (from behind: 5)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d8+1 damage
Money carried: 5 silver
Items carried: Long Sword; Plate Armor; Quarrel (15); Heavy Crossbow
Experience for defeating: 35 + 3 per hit point (89)

#101 5TH LVL FIGHTER True Neutral Human Fighter
Hit Dice  :   5  Character Levels    : Fighter 5
Hit Points:  39  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     17      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 14      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 11
Wisdom       14      Rod, Staff, or Wand            12
Dexterity    15      Petrification or Polymorph     13
Constitution 14      Breath Weapon                  13
Charisma     10      Spell                          14
THAC0:  16  Armor Class: 9 (from behind: 12)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d8 damage
Money carried: 5 copper; 2 silver
Experience for defeating: 90 + 5 per hit point (285)

#102 CAPTAIN         Lawful Evil Human Fighter
Hit Dice  :  10  Character Levels    : Fighter 10
Hit Points: 110  Movement:   9   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     18(51)  Base saving throws versus:

Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death  8
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand             9
Dexterity    17      Petrification or Polymorph     10
Constitution 17      Breath Weapon                   9
Charisma     14      Spell                          11
THAC0:   8  Armor Class: -6 (from behind: 2)
Physical attack: 1.5 for 1d8+7 damage
Money carried: 18 gold; 6 platinum
Items carried: Shield +2; Long Sword +4; Plate Mail +3; Quarrel (15); Light
  Crossbow
Experience for defeating: 900 + 14 per hit point (2440) + 48 for money (2488) +
  3600 for items (6088)

#103 WARRIOR         Lawful Evil Human Fighter
Hit Dice  :   2  Character Levels    : Fighter 2
Hit Points:  13  Movement:   9   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     16      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 14      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       14      Rod, Staff, or Wand            15
Dexterity    14      Petrification or Polymorph     16
Constitution 14      Breath Weapon                  17
Charisma     10      Spell                          17
THAC0:  19  Armor Class: 3 (from behind: 6)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d8+1 damage
Money carried: 1 silver
Items carried: Shield; Long Bow; Arrow (60); Silver Battle Axe; Banded Mail
Experience for defeating: 20 + 2 per hit point (46)

#104 PRINCESS FATIMA Lawful Good Human Fighter
Hit Dice  :   4  Character Levels    : Fighter 4
Hit Points:  33  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     18(01)  Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 14      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 13
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            14
Dexterity    18      Petrification or Polymorph     15
Constitution 16      Breath Weapon                  16
Charisma     15      Spell                          16
THAC0:  16  Armor Class: 3 (from behind: 10)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6+3 damage
Items carried: Shield; Leather Armor; Short Sword
Experience for defeating: 90 + 5 per hit point (255)

#105 VAMPIRE         Chaotic Evil Undead Monster Fighter
Clerics turn using this line on table: Vampire
Hit Dice  :   9  Character Levels    : Fighter 9
Hit Points:  15  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     18(76)  Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death  8
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand             9
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     10
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                   9
Charisma     10      Spell                          11
THAC0:  14  Armor Class: 1 (from behind: 3)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6+4 damage
Special Abilities: half damage from cold; vulnerability to holy water; half
  damage from electricity; charming gaze (free Charm Person every round; -2
  penalty to save); immunity to sleep, charm, paralysis, and poison; immunity
  to non-magical weapons; immunity to gaze attacks; regenerate 3 hit points per
  round; level-draining melee attack (2 levels)
Experience for defeating: 3800 + 12 per hit point (3980)

#106 WOLF            True Neutral Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :   3  Character Levels    : Fighter 3
Hit Points:  18  Movement:  18   Size: Large or larger (reversed)
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence  3      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 13
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            14
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     15
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  16
Charisma     10      Spell                          16
THAC0:  16  Armor Class: 7 (from behind: 9)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d4+1 damage
Experience for defeating: 35 + 3 per hit point (89)

#107 DIRTEN          Lawful Good Human Cleric
Hit Dice  :   5  Character Levels    : Cleric 5
Hit Points:  26  Movement:   9   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 15      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death  9
Wisdom       16      Rod, Staff, or Wand            12
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     13
Constitution  9      Breath Weapon                  15
Charisma     15      Spell                          14
THAC0:  18  Armor Class: 5 (from behind: 7)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6+1 damage
Spells known: All Cleric level 1 spells; All Cleric level 2 spells; All Cleric
  level 3 spells
Spells memorized: C1 Bless (2); C1 Cure Light Wounds (3); C2 Find Traps; C2
  Hold Person (2); C2 Slow Poison; C2 Spiritual Hammer; C3 Prayer
Money carried: 20 copper
Items carried: Wooden Holy Symbol; Mace; Chain Mail
Experience for defeating: 150 + 6 per hit point (306)

#108 ACOLYTE         Neutral Good Monster Cleric
Hit Dice  :   1  Character Levels    : Cleric 1
Hit Points:   8  Movement:   9   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 10
Wisdom       14      Rod, Staff, or Wand            13
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     14
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  16
Charisma     10      Spell                          15
THAC0:  20  Armor Class: 4 (from behind: 7)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6+1 damage
Spells known: All Cleric level 1 spells
Spells memorized: C1 Bless; C1 Cure Light Wounds; C1 Detect Magic
Money carried: 4 silver
Items carried: Silver Holy Symbol of Sune; Holy Water Vial; Shield; Mace; Chain
  Mail
Experience for defeating: 10 + 1 per hit point (18)

#109 HERO            Lawful Evil Human Fighter
Hit Dice  :   4  Character Levels    : Fighter 4
Hit Points:  35  Movement:   9   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     17      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 14      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 13
Wisdom       14      Rod, Staff, or Wand            14
Dexterity    17      Petrification or Polymorph     15
Constitution 17      Breath Weapon                  16
Charisma     10      Spell                          16
THAC0:  14  Armor Class: -1 (from behind: 4)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d10+2 damage
Money carried: 5 silver
Items carried: Long Bow; Arrow (60); Two-Handed Sword +1; Plate Mail +1
Experience for defeating: 60 + 4 per hit point (200) + 800 for items (1000)

#110 THEURGIST       True Neutral Human Magic-User
Hit Dice  :   4  Character Levels    : Magic-User 4
Hit Points:  13  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 15      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            13
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     11
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  15
Charisma     10      Spell                          12
THAC0:  20  Armor Class: 8 (from behind: 10)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d4 damage
Spells known: M1 Magic Missile; M1 Read Magic; M1 Sleep; M2 Knock; M2 Stinking
  Cloud
Spells memorized: M1 Read Magic; M1 Sleep (2); M2 Knock; M2 Stinking Cloud
Money carried: 20 copper
Items carried: Dart (6); Dagger; Ring of Protection +1
Experience for defeating: 75 + 4 per hit point (127) + 400 for items (527)

#111 ROBBER          Chaotic Neutral Human Thief
Hit Dice  :   4  Character Levels    : Thief 4
Hit Points:  16  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 13
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            12
Dexterity    18      Petrification or Polymorph     14
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  16
Charisma     10      Spell                          15
THAC0:  19  Armor Class: 3 (from behind: 9)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6+1 damage
Thief skills: Pick Pocket 55%; Open Locks 62%; Find/Remove Traps 40%; Move
  Silently 43%; Hide in Shadows 35%; Hear Noise 15%; Climb Walls 88%
Money carried: 5 silver
Items carried: Leather Armor +1; Short Sword +1
Experience for defeating: 90 + 5 per hit point (170) + 800 for items (970)

#112 CURATE          Lawful Good Human Cleric
Hit Dice  :   4  Character Levels    : Cleric 4
Hit Points:  26  Movement:   6   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 15      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death  9
Wisdom       16      Rod, Staff, or Wand            12
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     13
Constitution  9      Breath Weapon                  15
Charisma     15      Spell                          14
THAC0:  18  Armor Class: 3 (from behind: 5)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6+1 damage
Spells known: All Cleric level 1 spells; All Cleric level 2 spells
Spells memorized: C1 Bless (2); C1 Cure Light Wounds (3); C2 Hold Person (2);
  C2 Slow Poison; C2 Spiritual Hammer
Money carried: 20 copper
Items carried: Mace; Plate Mail
Experience for defeating: 90 + 5 per hit point (220)

#113 HIPPOGRIFF      True Neutral Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :   4
Hit Points:  18  Movement:  36   Size: Large or larger
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence  3      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 13
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            14
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     15
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  16
Charisma     10      Spell                          16
THAC0:  15  Armor Class: 5 (from behind: 7)
Primary physical attack: 2 for 1d6 damage
Secondary physical attack: 1 for 1d10 damage
Experience for defeating: 60 + 4 per hit point (132)

#114 MUMMY           Lawful Evil Undead Human Fighter
Clerics turn using this line on table: Mummy
Hit Dice  :   7  Character Levels    : Fighter 7
Hit Points:  33  Movement:   6   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     18(51)  Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 10
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            11
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     12
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  13
Charisma     10      Spell                          13
THAC0:  13  Armor Class: 3 (from behind: 5)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d12 damage
Special Abilities: vulnerability to holy water; vulnerability to fire (50%
  extra damage); immunity to cold; immunity to sleep, charm, paralysis, and
  poison; immunity to non-magical weapons; half damage from magical weapons;
  disease melee attack; mummy fear aura (at start of combat, all opponents must
  save or be paralyzed; humans save with a +2 bonus); vulnerability to
  electricity (sometimes)
Experience for defeating: 1150 + 8 per hit point (1414)

#116 PHASE SPIDER    True Neutral Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :   6
Hit Points:  35  Movement:   6   Size: Large or larger (reversed)
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence  3      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 11
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            12
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     13
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  13
Charisma     10      Spell                          14
THAC0:  13  Armor Class: 7 (from behind: 9)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6 damage
Special Abilities: blinking; save vs. poison at a -2 penalty on melee hit or
  die
Experience for defeating: 700 + 6 per hit point (910)

#118 THRI-KREEN      Chaotic Neutral Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :   7  Character Levels    : Fighter 7
Hit Points:  33  Movement:  18   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 10
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            11
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     12
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  12
Charisma     10      Spell                          13
THAC0:  13  Armor Class: 5 (from behind: 7)
Primary physical attack: 4 for 1d4 damage
Secondary physical attack: 1 for 1d4+1 damage
Special Abilities: missile evasion (60% chance of avoiding any missile attack);
  save vs. paralyzation on melee hit or be paralyzed for 2d8 rounds
Money carried: 3 gems
Experience for defeating: 800 + 8 per hit point (1064) + 750 for money (1814)

#119 TIGER           True Neutral Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :   6  Character Levels    : Fighter 6
Hit Points:  38  Movement:  12   Size: Large or larger
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence  3      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 11
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            12
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     13
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  13
Charisma     10      Spell                          14
THAC0:  13  Armor Class: 6 (from behind: 8)
Primary physical attack: 2 for 1d4+1 damage
Secondary physical attack: 1 for 1d10 damage
Special Abilities: rear claw rake (2 additional 2d4 attacks if 2 melee attacks
  hit)
Experience for defeating: 225 + 6 per hit point (453)

#120 WILD BOAR       True Neutral Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :   4  Character Levels    : Fighter 4
Hit Points:  18  Movement:  15   Size: Large or larger (reversed)
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence  3      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 13
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            14
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     15
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  16
Charisma     10      Spell                          16
THAC0:  15  Armor Class: 7 (from behind: 9)
Physical attack: 1 for 3d4 damage
Special Abilities: can continue to fight for 1d4+1 additional rounds after
  being reduced to 0 to -6 hit points
Experience for defeating: 85 + 4 per hit point (157)

#121 WYVERN          Neutral Evil Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :   9  Character Levels    : Fighter 9
Hit Points:  42  Movement:  24   Size: Large or larger
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death  8
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand             9
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     10
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                   9
Charisma     10      Spell                          11
THAC0:  12  Armor Class: 3 (from behind: 5)
Primary physical attack: 1 for 2d8 damage
Secondary physical attack: 1 for 1d6 damage
Special Abilities: save vs. poison on melee hit or die
Experience for defeating: 925 + 10 per hit point (1345)

#122 EVOKER          True Neutral Human Magic-User
Hit Dice  :   2  Character Levels    : Magic-User 2
Hit Points:   6  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 15      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            13
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     11
Constitution  9      Breath Weapon                  15
Charisma     15      Spell                          12
THAC0:  20  Armor Class: 9 (from behind: 11)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d4 damage
Spells known: M1 Magic Missile; M1 Read Magic; M1 Sleep
Spells memorized: M1 Sleep (2)
Money carried: 20 copper
Items carried: Dart (6); Dagger
Experience for defeating: 35 + 3 per hit point (53)

#123 KOBOLD          Lawful Evil Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :   0
Hit Points:   3  Movement:   6   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence  6      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 16
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            17
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     18
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  20
Charisma     10      Spell                          19
THAC0:  21  Armor Class: 7 (from behind: 9)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6 damage
Money carried: 16 copper
Items carried: Arrow (30); Short Bow; Short Sword
Experience for defeating: 5 + 1 per hit point (8)

#124 EFREETI         True Neutral Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :  10  Character Levels    : Fighter 10
Hit Points:  55  Movement:  24   Size: Large or larger
Strength     19      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death  8
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand             9
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph      9
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                   9
Charisma     10      Spell                          10
THAC0:  10  Armor Class: 2 (from behind: 4)
Physical attack: 1 for 3d8 damage
Special Abilities: efreeti fire resistance (-1 damage per die of fire damage)
Money carried: 6 gold
Experience for defeating: 1950 + 14 per hit point (2720) + 6 for money (2726)
Differences from tabletop: lacks Enlarge and Invisibility spells


SECTION 11.1.1 - Useful Hacking Utilities
---------------------------------------

Gold Box Companion is not just useful for playing the game; it now includes
numerous utilities useful for hacking.
http://gbc.zorbus.net/

DAXDump and ECLDump can be used to unpack the *.DAX files.  You may download
it from:
http://gbc.zorbus.net/daxdump.zip

Gold Box Explorer will allow you to investigate the contests of *.DAX and
*.ECL files.  Its project page is at:
https://github.com/bsimser/Gold-Box-Explorer

The Curse of the Azure Bonds remake is for the sequel, but it was helpful for
figuring out Gold Box-specific mechanics:
http://simeonpilgrim.com/blog/2008/07/22/curse-of-the-azure-bonds-build-1013/

The executable is partially compressed.  You can use UNP to decompress it
(which should not interfere with playing the game):
http://unp.bencastricum.nl/

SECTION 11.1.2 - DAX File Format
--------------------------------

The DAX file format compresses multiple files in each DAX file, using a form of
run-length encoding.

Header:
  * 2 bytes: little-endian 16-bit length of the rest of the header
  * Series of 9 byte file descriptors:
       Hex
    Offset  Function
        00  Number of this file (must be unique to this specific DAX)
     01-04  Little-endian 32-bit offset of the beginning of the file
     05-06  Little-endian 16-bit length of the decompressed file
     07-08  Little-endian 16-bit length of the compressed data

File (offsets do not count the header):
  First byte is the run length:
  * If run length bit 128 not set:
    Copy the next (run length + 1) bytes to the decompressed file as is.
  * If run length bit 128 set:
    Treat run length as signed 8-bit, then negate: repeat this number of the
    succeeding byte.
  If there are data left, the next byte is now the new run length.

SECTION 11.2.1 - Creature File Format
-------------------------------------

This is for both characters (*.SAV in a saved game, *.CHA outside the party)
and monsters (MON?CHA.DAX, must be dumped with one of the hacking utilities).

A * indicates fields values that are defined, but not supported, by the game.
For known spells (0x33 to 0x69), 0 means spell is not known, 1 means spell is
  known.  The number of the spell description is used in memorized spells
  (0x17 to 0x2B).

    Hex
 Offset  Function (offsets are in hexadecimal, values are in decimal)
    000  Length of name (valid values: 1-15)
001-00F  Character name (standard ASCII encoding)
    010  Strength (current; does not include extraordinary strength)
    011  Intelligence (current)
    012  Wisdom (current)
    013  Dexterity (current)
    014  Constitution (current)
    015  Charisma (current)
    016  Extraordinary strength (current; only valid when offset 0x10 = 18)
017-02B  Memorized spells (0 means no spell; anything else is a single spell)
    02C  (always 0x00 for monsters)
    02D  60 minus THAC0 (base)
    02E  Race:
           0 monster
           1 dwarf
           2 elf
           3 gnome
           4 half-elf
           5 halfling
           6* half-orc
           7 human
    02F  Class:
           0 cleric
           1* druid
           2 fighter
           3* paladin
           4* ranger
           5 magic-user
           6 thief
           7* monk
           8 cleric/fighter
           9 cleric/fighter/magic-user
           10* cleric/ranger
           11 cleric/magic-user
           12* cleric/thief
           13 fighter/magic-user
           14 fighter/thief
           15 fighter/magic-user/thief
           16 magic-user/thief
           17 monster
030-031  Age (little-endian)
    032  Hit points (maximum)
    033  Spell  1: C1 Bless
    034  Spell  2: C1 Curse
    035  Spell  3: C1 Cure Light Wounds
    036  Spell  4: C1 Cause Light Wounds
    037  Spell  5: C1 Detect Magic
    038  Spell  6: C1 Protection from Evil
    039  Spell  7: C1 Protection from Good
    03A  Spell  8: C1 Resist Cold
    03B  Spell  9: M1 Burning Hands
    03C  Spell 10: M1 Charm Person
    03D  Spell 11: M1 Detect Magic
    03E  Spell 12: M1 Enlarge
    03F  Spell 13: M1 Reduce
    040  Spell 14: M1 Friends
    041  Spell 15: M1 Magic Missile
    042  Spell 16: M1 Protection from Evil
    043  Spell 17: M1 Protection from Good
    044  Spell 18: M1 Read Magic
    045  Spell 19: M1 Shield
    046  Spell 20: M1 Shocking Grasp
    047  Spell 21: M1 Sleep
    048  Spell 22: C2 Find Traps
    049  Spell 23: C2 Hold Person
    04A  Spell 24: C2 Resist Fire
    04B  Spell 25: C2 Silence, 15' Radius
    04C  Spell 26: C2 Slow Poison
    04D  Spell 27: C2 Snake Charm
    04E  Spell 28: C2 Spiritual Hammer
    04F  Spell 29: M2 Detect Invisibility
    050  Spell 30: M2 Invisibility
    051  Spell 31: M2 Knock
    052  Spell 32: M2 Mirror Image
    053  Spell 33: M2 Ray of Enfeeblement
    054  Spell 34: M2 Stinking Cloud
    055  Spell 35: M2 Strength
    056  Spell 36: C3 Animate Dead
    057  Spell 37: C3 Cure Blindness
    058  Spell 38: C3 Cause Blindness
    059  Spell 39: C3 Cure Disease
    05A  Spell 40: C3 Cause Disease
    05B  Spell 41: C3 Dispel Magic
    05C  Spell 42: C3 Prayer
    05D  Spell 43: C3 Remove Curse
    05E  Spell 44: C3 Bestow Curse
    05F  Spell 45: M3 Blink
    060  Spell 46: M3 Dispel Magic
    061  Spell 47: M3 Fireball
    062  Spell 48: M3 Haste
    063  Spell 49: M3 Hold Person
    064  Spell 50: M3 Invisibility, 10' Radius
    065  Spell 51: M3 Lightning Bolt
    066  Spell 52: M3 Protection from Evil, 10' Radius
    067  Spell 53: M3 Protection from Good, 10' Radius
    068  Spell 54: M3 Protection from Normal Missiles
    069  Spell 55: M3 Slow
    06A  Spell 56: C7 Restoration
    06B  Highest level
    06C  Lower 7 bits, icon size (1 = 1x1, 2 = 1x2, 3 = 2x1, 4 = 2x2)
         bit 128 = creature is Large or larger
    06D  Base saving throw vs. paralyzation, poison or death
    06E  Base saving throw vs. petrification or polymorph
    06F  Base saving throw vs. rod, staff or wand
    070  Base saving throw vs. breath weapon
    071  Base saving throw vs. spell
    072  Base movement
    073  Hit dice
    074  Drained levels
    075  Drained hit points
    076  If non-zero, can be turned (number indicates which line on table)
    077  Thief skill (includes all modifiers): Pick Pockets
    078  Thief skill (includes all modifiers): Open Locks
    079  Thief skill (includes all modifiers): Find/Remove Traps
    07A  Thief skill (includes all modifiers): Move Silently
    07B  Thief skill (includes all modifiers): Hide in Shadows
    07C  Thief skill (includes all modifiers): Hear Noise
    07D  Thief skill (includes all modifiers): Climb Walls
    07E  Thief skill (includes all modifiers): Read Languages
07F-082  Effects pointer
    083  (always 0xff for monsters)
    084  NPC status (always 0xff for monsters)
    085  NPC treasure share (looks like it's supposed to be lower 7 bits as
         share, bit 128 as item flag ... except this is 255 half the time)
086-087  (always 0x00 for monsters)
088-089  Copper coins (little-endian)
08A-08B  Silver coins (little-endian)
08C-08D  Electrum coins (little-endian)
08E-08F  Gold coins (little-endian)
090-091  Platinum coins (little-endian)
092-093  Gems (little-endian)
094-095  Jewelry (little-endian)
    096  Cleric level
    097* Druid level
    098  Fighter level
    099* Paladin level
    09A* Ranger level
    09B  Magic-user level
    09C  Thief level
    09D* Monk level
    09E  Gender
           0 male
           1 female
    09F  Monster type (there are several miscategorized monsters):
           0 humanoid
           1 monstrous humanoid
           2 giant
           3 dragon
           4 undead
           7 extra-dimensional
           8 fire-based
           9 cold-based
           10 regenerating
           11 reptile
           12 avian
           14 snake
           15 mammalian quadruped
           16 creepy-crawly
           17 generic monster
    0A0  Alignment:
           0 lawful good
           1 lawful neutral
           2 lawful evil
           3 neutral good
           4 true neutral
           5 neutral evil
           6 chaotic good
           7 chaotic neutral
           8 chaotic evil
    0A1  Base number of primary attacks, multiplied by 2
    0A2  Base number of secondary attacks, multiplied by 2
    0A3  Base primary attack number of dice
    0A4  Base secondary attack number of dice
    0A5  Base primary attack dice sides
    0A6  Base secondary attack dice sides
    0A7  Base primary attack bonus damage (without modifiers)
    0A8  Base secondary attack bonus damage (without modifiers)
    0A9  60 minus Armor Class (base)
    0AA  Strength bonus allowed
    0AB  Combat icon
0AC-0AF  Experience (little-endian)
    0B0  Item usage flags
    0B1  Hit points rolled
    0B2  Cleric 1st level spell slots
    0B3  Cleric 2nd level spell slots
    0B4  Cleric 3rd level spell slots
    0B5  Magic-user 1st level spell slots
    0B6  Magic-user 2nd level spell slots
    0B7  Magic-user 3rd level spell slots
0B8-0B9  Experience for defeating
    0BA  Bonus experience per HP for defeating
    0BB  Portrait head
    0BC  Portrait body
    0BD  Icon head
    0BE  Icon weapon
    0BF  (always 0x00 for monsters)
    0C0  Icon size
0C1-0C6  Icon colors
    0C7  Special vulnerability flags
0C8-0CB  Items pointer
0CC-0CF  Equipped weapon pointer
0D0-0D3  Equipped shield pointer
0D4-0D7  Equipped body armor pointer
0D8-0DB  Equipped gauntlets pointer
0DC-0DF  Equipped helm pointer
0E0-0E3  Equipped belt pointer
0E4-0E7  Equipped robe pointer
0E8-0EB  Equipped cloak pointer
0EC-0EF  Equipped boots pointer
0F0-0F3  Equipped ring 1 pointer
0F4-0F7  Equipped ring 2 pointer
0F8-0FB  Equipped arrow pointer
0FC-0FF  Equipped bolt pointer
    100  Hands used
    101  Saving throw bonus
102-103  Encumbrance in coins (little-endian)
104-107  Next character pointer
108-10B  Combat pointer
    10C  Status:
           0 okay
           1 animated
           2 tempgone
           3 running
           4 unconscious
           5 dying
           6 dead
           7 stoned
           8 gone
    10D  In combat
    10E  Side in combat:
           0 allied
           1 enemy
    10F  Autocombat flag
    110  60 minus THAC0 (current, characters only)
    111  60 minus Armor Class (current)
    112  60 minus Armor Class for rear attacks (current)
    113  Primary attacks remaining, multiplied by 2
    114  Secondary attacks remaining, multiplied by 2
    115  Current primary attack number of dice
    116  Current secondary attack number of dice
    117  Current primary attack dice sides
    118  Current secondary attack dice sides
    119  Current primary attack bonus damage
    11A  Current secondary attack bonus damage
    11B  Hit points (current)
    11C  Movement (current)

SECTION 11.2.2 - Creature Effects List
--------------------------------------

This for both characters and monsters, which both have effects files consisting
of a series of 9-byte fields.  These are named *.SPC for characters, and
MON?SPC.BIN (inside MON?SPC.DAX) for monsters.  The first byte indicates which
effect:

Hex
Value Effect (specific spell effects are capitalized)
0x01  Bless
0x02  Curse
0x03  wielding Two-Handed Sword vs. Undead
0x04  studying Manual of Bodily Health
0x05  Detect Magic
0x06  wielding Flame Tongue sword (the actual Flame Tongue sword doesn't work)
0x07  training with Manual of Modily Health
0x08  Protection from Evil
0x09  Protection from Good
0x0A  Resist Cold
0x0B  charmed
0x0C  Enlarge
0x0D  Reduce
0x0E  Friends
0x0F  Slow Poison
0x10  Read Magic
0x11  Shield
0x12  gnome THAC0 bonus versus kobolds and goblins
0x13  Find Traps
0x14  Resist Fire
0x15  Silence, 15' Radius
0x16  Slow Poison worn off
0x17  Spiritual Hammer
0x18  see invisibility (works on 0x19 but not 0x47)
0x19  invisibility
0x1A  dwarf THAC0 bonus versus half-orcs, goblins, hobgoblins, and orcs
0x1B  feather falling
0x1C  Mirror Image
0x1D  Ray of Enfeeblement
0x1E  nauseated
0x1F  helpless
0x20  Animate Dead
0x21  blind
0x22  diseased (both Strength drain and hit point drain)
0x23  affected by allied Prayer
0x24  Bestow Curse
0x25  blinking
0x26  extra strength
0x27  hasted
0x28  in Stinking Cloud
0x29  Protection from Normal Missiles
0x2A  slowed
0x2B  diseased (Strength drain)
0x2C  diseased (hit point drain)
0x2D  Protection from Evil, 10' Radius
0x2E  Protection from Good, 10' Radius
0x2F  dwarf/gnome AC bonus versus ogres, trolls, ogre magi, giants, and titans
0x30  gnome AC bonus versus gnolls and bugbears
0x31  Prayer
0x32  mummy disease
0x33  Snake Charm
0x34  held
0x35  sleeping
0x36  repulsed (unimplemented bronze dragon attack)
0x37  poisoned
0x38  invisibility (from ring)
0x39  unknown
0x3A  unknown
0x3B  add effect 0x62
0x3C  unknown
0x3D  wearing Ring of Fire Resistance
0x3E  regeneration from Constitution 20+
0x3F  unknown
0x40  poison melee attack (unmodified saving throw)
0x41  poison melee attack (+4 bonus to saving throw)
0x42  poison melee attack (+2 bonus to saving throw)
0x43  paralysis melee attack (save or be paralyzed for 2d8 minutes)
0x44  paralysis melee attack (does not affect elves)
0x45  paralysis melee attack (-2 penalty to saving throw)
0x46  poison melee attack (-2 penalty to saving throw)
0x47  invisible (from dust; detect invisibility does not work on this)
0x48  camouflaged
0x49  rear claw rake (2 additional 2d4 attacks if 2 melee attacks hit)
0x4A  unknown
0x4B  unknown
0x4C  blood draining attack (1d4 damage per round on melee hit, 12 dam total)
0x4D  bite and hold attack (bite attack holds defender in place)
0x4E  unknown
0x4F  fire touch of Tyranthraxus (2d10 additional fire damage on melee hit)
0x50  anhkheg acid melee attack (1d4 additional acid damage on melee hit)
0x51  dragon fear aura (opponents with 3 or fewer HD must save or be paralyzed)
0x52  mummy fear aura (all opponents must save or be paralyzed; humans at +2)
0x53  petrifying gaze
0x54  charming gaze (free Charm Person every round; -2 penalty to save)
0x55  level-draining melee attack (1 level)
0x56  level-draining melee attack (2 levels)
0x57  disease melee attack
0x58  electrical breath attack (100% chance, then 50% after; max HP damage)
0x59  displaced
0x5A  unknown
0x5B  immunity to electricity
0x5C  unknown
0x5D  half damage from fire
0x5E  half damage from blunt and piercing weapons
0x5F  fighting on after being reduced to 0 to -6 hit points
0x60  immunity to weapons that aren't either silver or magical
0x61  dwarf/gnome/halfling spell/wand saving throw bonus
0x62  regenerate 3 hit points per round
0x63  keeps fighting after becoming unconscious (gain 1d4+1 minutes of 0x5F)
0x64  troll vulnerability to fire and acid
0x65  regenerate 3 hit points per round; can return from death in 3d6 rounds
0x66  unknown
0x67  immunity to non-magical weapons (distinction vs. 0x77 unknown)
0x68  thri-kreen missile evasion (60% chance of avoiding missile attacks)
0x69  unknown
0x6A  100% magic resistance
0x6B  elven 90% resistance to sleep and charm spells
0x6C  immunity to sleep and charm
0x6D  immunity to paralysis (only Hold Person and wand)
0x6E  immunity to cold
0x6F  immunity to paralysis and poison
0x70  immunity to fire
0x71  efreeti fire resistance (-1 damage per fire damage die)
0x72  half damage from electricity
0x73  half damage from piercing and slashing weapons
0x74  half damage from magical weapons
0x75  vulnerability to holy water
0x76  half damage from cold
0x77  immunity to non-magical weapons (distinction vs. 0x67 unknown)
0x78  boulder evasion (50% chance of avoiding thrown boulders)
0x79  anhkheg acid squirt attack (range 3, 8d4 damage)
0x7A  vulnerability to fire
0x7B  immunity to weapons that aren't either silver (half damage) or magical
0x7C  half-elven 30% resistance to sleep and charm spells
0x7D  immunity to sleep, charm, paralysis, and poison
0x7E  immunity to gaze attacks
0x7F  reflectable gaze

The second and third bytes are the 16-bit little-endian number of minutes
remaining of the effect (except for 0x3E).

The fourth byte:
  * 255 for a permanent effect
  * otherwise, indicates strength of spell
    * lower 4 bits are often the level of the caster, for Dispel Magic; known
      exceptions:
      * 0x0C (Enlarge): level of Strength granted
      * 0x0E (Friends): Charisma bonus
    * upper 4 bits:
      * 0x1C Mirror Image: number of images remaining

SECTION 11.2.3 - Item File Format
---------------------------------

This is for both characters (*.ITM), and placed treasures (ITEM?.DAX) and
monsters (MON?ITM.DAX).  DAX files must be dumped with one of the hacking
utilities.

Each item entry is 63 bytes.

   Hex
Offset  Function (offsets are in hexadecimal, values are in decimal)
    00  Display name length
 01-2D  Display name (in ASCII, lowercase OK, null-terminated
    2E  Type
    2F  Identified name component 3
    30  Identified name component 2
    31  Identified name component 1
    32  Magical bonus (signed 8-bit)
    33  Saving throw bonus (signed 8-bit)
    34  Equipped (0 = unequipped, 1 = equipped)
    35  Unidentified name components bitmask
    36  Cursed (0 = uncursed, 1 = cursed)
 37-38  Weight in coins (unsigned little-endian 16-bit)
    39  Quantity (0 = single item that does not stack)
 3A-3B  Item value in gold pieces (unsigned little-endian 16-bit)
 3C-3E  Properties:
          If item is scroll: 1-56 are spells (as in Creature File Format)
          If item is any other magical consumable:
            3C = number of charges
            3D = effect:
                  3 Potion of Extra Healing
                 51 Wand of Lightning (Bolt)
                 80 Potion of Speed
                 81 Keoghtum's Ointment
                 82 Potion of Giant Strength
                 83 Javelin of Lightning
                 84 Wand of Paralyzation
                 85 Potion of Healing
                 86 Dust of Disappearance
                 87 Necklace of Missiles
                 88 Wand of Magic Missiles
                 90 Manual of Bodily Health
          Otherwise, check 3E (if not stated otherwise, confers any effect in
            3D if it is not 0):
            129 Ring of Fire Resistance
            131 Gauntlets of Ogre Power
            132 Aligned weapon; must have an alignment equal to the lower 4
                bits of 3D, or take damage equal to the upper 4 bits of 3D
            133 Cloak of Displacement
            134 Cloak of Elvenkind
            135 boulder
            136 Undead slaying weapon; bonus against undead in 3D
            137 Spiritual Hammer
            139 Ring of Invisibility

Base items are in the file named ITEMS, which has a 2-byte header, followed by
a series of 16-byte item descriptors:
   Hex
Offset  Function (offsets are in hexadecimal, values are in decimal)
    00  Slot: 0 = main hand, 1 = off hand, 2 = body armor, 3 = gauntlets, 4 =
          helm, 5 = belt, 6 = robe, 7 = cloak, 8 = boots, 9 = ring, 10 =
          ammunition
    01  Hands required to use
    02  Damage vs. large, dice number
    03  Damage vs. large, dice sides
    04  Damage vs. large, bonus
    05  Rate of fire for ranged weapons (multiplied by 2)
    06  AC adjustment: If 178 or higher, body armor or bracers bonus equal to
          the excess.  If not, but is 128 or higher, other AC bonus equal to
          the excess.
    07  Weapon type: 0 = slashing, 1 = piercing, 128 = bashing
    08  unknown
    09  Damage vs. small/medium, dice number
    0A  Damage vs. small/medium, dice sides
    0B  Damage vs. small/medium, bonus
    0C  If non-zero, range of ranged weapon
    0D  Class usability bitmask:
        bit 1 magic-user
        bit 2 cleric
        bit 4 thief
        bit 8 fighter
        bit 16* druid
        bit 32* monk
        bit 64* paladin or ranger
    0E  Ammunition: 10 = doesn't require ammo, 11 = arrows, 15 = arrows with
          Strength bonus, 20 = non-stacking thrown, 26 = stacking thrown,
          138 = bolts
    0F  unknown (always 0)

SECTION 11.3.1 - Script Overview
--------------------------------

The game scripts, written in Gold Box bytecode that changes a little from game
to game, are in the ECL?.DAX files, where ? is the disk number.

The DAX files are compressed files that can be analyzed with any of Gold Box
Companion, Gold Box Explorer, DaxDump, or EclDump.

You can modify individual scripts and put them back in the game files.

SECTION 11.3.2 - Script Variable Types
--------------------------------------

All script commands that take a variable must explicitly declare its type.

0x00 8-bit integer value
     This is usually unsigned, and underflows below 0 or overflows above 255
     appropriately.

     The Gold Box games have multiple ways of handling signed 8-bit integers:
     * THAC0 and Armor Class are stored as (60 - number).
     * Sometimes, 128 is treated as 0.
     * Sometimes, the standard C logic for signed 8-bit integers is used.

     These are often stored as a 16-bit, which is why the save files have a lot
     of flags interleaved with 0x00.

0x01 16-bit little-endian address pointing to 8-bit integer value

0x02 16-bit unsigned integer value, little-endian

0x80 String value
     * The first byte has the number of subsequent encoded bytes.
     * The subsequent bytes hold 6-bit values as follows:
       encoded bits: abcdefgh | ijklmnop | qrstuvwx
       decoded bits: abcdef | ghijkl | mnopqr | stuvwx
     * 0 is not a null terminator; it is ignored.
     * 1 to 26 represent the letters A-Z (ASCII code minus 64).
     * 32 to 63 use the standard ASCII encoding.
     A comparison of a string value will decompress and decode it.

0x81 String reference
     Unlike string values, this points to a standard C string (ASCII-encoded
     and null-terminated).

SECTION 11.3.3 - Script Commands
--------------------------------

All ECL script commands are a single byte.  The names for the commands are the
same given by debug mode.

A <var> can be either a value or an address; for the latter, the value stored
there will be retrieved (dereferenced).

0x00 EXIT
     Stops execution and returns control to the player.

0x01 GOTO <address>
     Continues execution at <address>.

0x02 GOSUB <address>
     Continues execution at <address>, and pushes the current bytecode address
     to the stack.

0x03 COMPARE <var1> <var2>
     Compares <var1> and <var2> for a subsequent IF command.

0x04 ADD <var1> <var2> <address>
     The result <var1> + <var2> is placed in <address>.

0x05 SUBTRACT <var1> <var2> <address>
     The result of <var2> - <var1> is placed in <address>.  Yes, the
     subtrahend comes first.

0x06 DIVIDE <var1> <var2> <address>
     The result of <var1> / <var2> is placed in <address>.  This is integer
     division, with the dividend coming first.  I don't think the remainder is
     stored anywhere, unlike in later Gold Box games.

0x07 MULTIPLY <var1> <var2> <address>
     Stores <var1> * <var2> in <address>.

0x08 RANDOM <var> <address>
     Generates a random integer from 0 to <var>, inclusive, and stores it in
     <address>.  The random number generator isn't robust.

0x09 SAVE <var> <address>
     Stores <var> in <address>.

0x0A LOAD CHARACTER <var>
     * If <var> is less than 128:
       Loads the statistics for the indicated character, where 0 is first in
       the marching order, and (party size - 1) is the last.  If <var> is at
       least equal to party size, monsters from LOAD MONSTER are loaded.
       References to $6B00 to $6C1B are now references for the appropriate
       statistics.  As a reference and not a copy, SAVE or SAVE TABLE actually
       change the character or monster.
     * If <var> is 128 or more:
       Monster (<var> - 128) will be physically placed on the party's side in
       the next combat.  If $6B00 and $6C00 are subsequently set to 0, this
       instead removes the monster; Pool of Radiance doesn't have the DUMP
       command all other Gold Box games have.

0x0B LOAD MONSTER <monsterID> <count> <graphicID>
     Adds <count> copies of monster <monsterID> to the monster list.
     <graphicID>, taken from CPIC?.DAX, is often equal to <monsterID>.

0x0C SETUP MONSTER <monsterID> <distance> <graphicID>
     Starts a monster encounter with the primary monster <monsterID>,
     <distance> (which can be 0-2) squares away in the first-person view.

0x0D APPROACH
     The monsters from SETUP MONSTER close distance by 1 square.  If distance
     is 0, this does nothing.

0x0E PICTURE <pictureID>
     * If <pictureID> is 255:
       Ends the graphical display and resumes the normal first-person view.
     * If <pictureID> is defined in BODY?.DAX:
       Displays a composite head and body graphic, using $6DE1 as the head in
       HEAD?.DAX and <pictureID> as the body in BODY?.DAX.
     * Otherwise:
       Displays the specified picture from PIC?.DAX in the first-person view.
       If there is more than one such picture, this displays an animation
       cycling through all such pictures.

0x0F INPUT NUMBER <maxDigits> <address>
     Asks the player to input a number with <maxDigits> maximum digits, and
     places it in <address>.

0x10 INPUT STRING <maxLength> <address>
     Asks the player to input a string with <maxLength> maximum characters, and
     places it at <address>.

0x11 PRINT <string>
     Prints <string> to the text box.

0x12 PRINTCLEAR <string>
     As above, but clears the text box first.

0x13 RETURN
     Returns from a GOSUB, with the next command executed the one after the
     most recent GOSUB pushed to the stack.

0x14 COMPARE AND <val1> <val2> <val3> <val4>
     Compares <val1> to <val2> and <val3> to <val4> for a subsequent IF
     command.

0x15 VERTICAL MENU <address> <message> <count> <stringVarargs>
     Displays <message> as a prompt in the text box, with the player able to
     select from the <count> options listed as <stringVarargs>.  The chosen
     option is placed in <address>, with 0 the first option and (<count> - 1)
     the last.

0x16 IF =
0x17 IF <>
0x18 IF <
0x19 IF >
0x1A IF <=
0x1B IF >=
     All six IF commands will skip the next command unless the most recent:
     * COMPARE has a true comparisons
     * COMPARE AND has both comparisons true
     * GETTABLE has a true comparison to 0
     * AND has a true comparison to 0
     * FIND ITEM found a character carrying the appropriate item
     This means bit flags are checked with AND followed by an IF <>.

0x1C CLEARMONSTERS
     Removes all monsters from the LOAD MONSTER list.

0x1D PARTYSTRENGTH <address>
     Calculates Party Strength using the calculation given in the Party
     Strength section, and places it in <address>.

0x1E CHECKPARTY <attributeAddress> <effectID> <unknown> <address1>
                <unknown> <address2>
     * If attributeAddress is not 0 and effectID is 0:
       Checks all characters for the values in <attributeAddress> ($6B00 to
       $6C1B).  Then <address1> will hold the highest value and <address2> will
       hold the lowest.
     * If attributeAddress is 0 and effectID is not 0:
       Checks all characters for the given <effectID>.  Then <address2> will
       hold 0 if no characters have the effect, or 1 if at least one character
       does.

0x1F undefined

0x20 NEWECL <script>
     Loads the indicated ECL script.

0x21 LOAD FILES <mapID> <unknown> <unknown>

0x22 PARTY SURPRISE <address1> <address2>
     Initializes <address1> and <address2> for a subsequent SURPRISE command.
     <address1> is the roll on a d6 for the monsters to surprise the party.
     <address2> is the roll on a d6 for the party to surprise the monsters.
     These are both initialized to 2, the standard values; rolls must be equal
     to or less than this to succeed.  If different values are wanted for the
     party, they can be modified before the SURPRISE command.

0x23 SURPRISE <address1> <address2> <var1> <var2>
     Rolls for surprise, with the addresses expected to be initialized by the
     PARTY SURPRISE command.
     <var1> is the monsters' modifier to surprise added to <address1>.
     <var2> is the monsters' modifier to be surprised subtracted from
       <address2>.

     The end result is placed in $6DCB:
       0 Neither side surprised
       1 Monsters surprise party
       2 Party surprises monsters
       3 Monsters and party surprise each other

0x24 COMBAT
     * Usually:
       Starts combat with the list of monsters from LOAD MONSTER.

       Combat can be modified by the following:
       * All monsters have Morale of $6DC6.
       * If $6DCB is 1 or 2, the surprising side may get surprise actions.
       * If $6E70 is not 0, it acts as a signed 8-bit bonus to all monsters'
         THAC0.
       * If $6E71 is not 0, it acts as a signed 8-bit bonus to all
         characters' THAC0 and damage.
       * If $6E72 is not 0, it acts as a signed 8-bit bonus to characters'
         movement if they are humans, half-elves, or elves.
       * The TREASURE command will load additional items that will show up as
         loot if the party wins.
       * If $6DE3 is 1, the monsters will not drop the items they are carrying.

       After combat:
       * $6DC7 is set to 0 if the party won, or 129 if it ran away.
       * $6DC8 is set to the number of monsters the party killed.
       * $6E33 is set to 1 if the party attacked allies during the fight.
       * $6DCB, $6DE3, $6E70, $6E71, and $6E72 are all reset to 0.

     * If $6DE2 is 1:
       The party instead enters a temple.  $6DE2 is set back to 0 when done.

     * If $6E6C is 1:
       The party instead enters a shop.  $6E6C is set back to 0 when done.
       Available items for sale are what was loaded with the TREASURE command.
       Purchase prices are multiplied by ($6E6D / 16).  Prices are unsigned
       16-bit integers and will overflow if they exceed 65535.

0x25 ON GOTO <var> <count> <addressVarargs>
     * If <var> is less than <count>, this acts as a GOTO command with the
       corresponding address from <addressVarargs>.
     * If <var> is equal to or greater than <count>, execution falls through to
       the next statement.

0x26 ON GOSUB <var> <count> <addressVarargs>
     Same as ON GOTO, except a GOSUB is executed.

0x27 TREASURE <copper> <silver> <electrum> <gold> <platinum>
              <gems> <jewelry> <treasureID>
     This adds all the indicated treasure for the next COMBAT.
     If treasure ID is:
       * 0 to 127: all the treasure from that list is added.
       * 128 to 254: <treasureID> minus 128 random magical items are added.
       * 255: no items are added.

0x28 ROB <isWholeParty> <percentMoney> <itemChance>
     Takes money and items away.
     * If <isWholeParty> is 0, affects only the chosen character;
     * If <isWholeParty> is 1, affects all characters.

     All affected characters always lose <percentMoney>% money.

     For <itemChance>, consider every item:
     * If item is less than 2.5 pounds, <itemChance>% chance of loss
     * If item is 2.5 to 25.5 pounds, (<itemChance> - 50)% chance of loss
     * If item is more than 25.5 pounds, (<itemChance> - 90)% chance of loss
     You can't lose a medium item if <itemChance> is below 50, and you can't
     lose a heavy item if <itemChance> is below 90.

0x29 ENCOUNTER MENU <monsterID> <distance> <pictureID> <address>
                    <combat> <wait> <flee> <advance> <parley>
                    <message0> <message1> <message2>
                    <movement1> <movement2>
     Starts an encounter with the monster with <monsterID> and <pictureID>,
     starting <distance> squares away.  The messages displayed in the text box
     are for the given distance from the party; if no message is defined, the
     message for lower distance is used.

     <combat>, <wait>, <flee>, <advance>, <parley> all define what happens if
     you choose that action:
       0 combat
       1 do whatever you chose
       2 monsters flee (unless you attacked them)
       3 monsters advance
       4 parley
     Your party does not "F"lee unless you choose to do so; success depends on
     the movement of your slowest party member compared to <movement1> and
     <movement2>.  (Those are usually identical; I'm not sure what the
     difference is.)

     If the party successfully advanced, the menu is repeated.

     The resolution is placed in <address>:
       0 monsters flee
       1 combat begins
       2 party flees
       3 parley

0x2A GETTABLE <address1> <var> <address2>
     Retrieves the value from address <address1 + var> and places it in
     <address2>.  Equivalent to retrieving a value from an array.

0x2B HORIZONTAL MENU <address> <count> <stringVarargs>
     Similar to VERTICAL MENU, but the message to the player must be printed
     beforehand, and the string choices are displayed on the bottom menu bar.
     The player can additionally select an option with the first letter of the
     string.

     Scripted "Press <enter>/<return> to continue" prompts use this in earlier
     Gold Box games.  "P" will work for these prompts; an address must still be
     supplied, which can cause bugs.

0x2C PARLAY [sic] <haughty> <sly> <nice> <meek> <abusive> <address>
     Gives the player the option to choose a parley attitude; the value
     defined for the chosen option is placed in <address>.

0x2D CALL <address>
     Executes and returns from the machine code (not bytecode) at the indicated
     address.

0x2E DAMAGE <var1> <dice> <sides> <bonus> <var2>
     This does damage equal to <dice>d<sides> + <bonus>.
     If <var1> is from 1 to 127:
       This executes <var1> physical attacks on random characters, with a
       THAC0 of (60 - <var2>).

     If <var1> is 128 or higher:
       Who gets damaged depends on <var1> bit 64:
       * If set, the entire party takes damage.
       * If not set, but bit 1 is, a random character takes damage.
       * Otherwise, the currently chosen character takes damage.

       The saving throw depends on <var1> bit 32:
       * If set, the damage always hits.
       * If not set, damage can be avoided with a saving throw defined in the
         lower 7 bits of <var2>:
           0 saving throw vs. paralyzation, poison or death
           1 saving throw vs. petrification or polymorph
           2 saving throw vs. rod, staff or wand
           3 saving throw vs. breath weapon
           4 saving throw vs. spell

0x2F AND <var1> <var2> <address>
     The result of a bitwise AND on <var1> and <var2> is placed in <address>.
     This is used to read bit flags.

0x30 OR <var1> <var2> <address>
     The result of a bitwise OR on <var1> and <var2> is placed in <address>.
     This is used to set bit flags, though ADD is also used.

0x31 SPRITE OFF

0x32 FIND ITEM <itemID>
     This checks all party members for an item with the given <itemID> for a
     subsequent IF.

0x33 PRINT RETURN
     Prints a single blank line to the text box.

0x34 ECL CLOCK <var> <timeunit>
     Not used in Pool of Radiance.

0x35 SAVE TABLE <var1> <address> <var2>
     Reverse of GETTABLE; places <var1> in <address + var2>.  Equivalent to
     storing a value in an array.

0x36 ADD NPC <monsterID> <morale>
     Adds the given monster to your party, with the indicated <morale>.

0x37 LOAD PIECES <walldefID> <unknown> <unknown>

0x38 PROGRAM <program>
     Runs a special routine depending on <program>:
       0 training hall (using the class bitmask in $6DA8)
       8 win game
       9 camp

0x39 WHO <message>
     Shows <message> and has the player select a party member, who also gets
     LOAD CHARACTER executed.

0x3A DELAY

0x3B SPELL <spellID> <address1> <address2>
     Searches for a character with the given spell:
     * if no such character exists: <address1> will hold 255;
     * if such a character does exist:
       <address1> will hold the index of the spell slot;
       <address2> will hold the index of the character;
       also, a LOAD CHARACTER <address2> command is executed.

0x3C PROTECTION <address>
     Prints a runic phrase from <address>.

0x3D CLEAR BOX

SECTION 11.4.1 - Flag List
--------------------------

The game scripts use 256 16-bit flags ($4A00 to $4AFF in the game scripts) to
hold most non-character game state.  They are almost always treated as unsigned
8-bit integers, even though they can hold 16-bit integers and are effectively
bytes with 16 bits.

$4A00 to $4A1F are reset to 0 every time a new script is loaded.
$4A20 to $4AFF are not automatically reset; sometimes the game scripts do.

In the save file (SAVGAM?.DAT; ? is the letter of the save), $4A00 corresponds
to 0x201 in the save file.  So to convert the below addresses to save file
addresses:
  (1) subtract 0x4A00
  (2) multiply by 2
  (3) add 0x201

$4A00 Shared flag:
      Slums: 255 got message from entering map
      Sokal Keep 1: 255 destroyed elf skeleton
$4A01 Shared flag:
      Podal Plaza: random encounter number of base monsters
      Kobold Caves 1: dealt with pit
      Valhingen Graveyard: count of new random skeletons for current visit
$4A02 Shared flag:
      Podal Plaza: random encounter base monster ID
      Temple of Bane 2: 1 destroyed altar to Bane
      Cadorna Textile House 5a: 255 hobgoblins defeated
      Valhingen Graveyard: count of new random zombies for current visit
$4A03 Shared flag:
      Sokal Keep: random encounter counter
      Podal Plaza: random encounter number of monster leaders
      Kobold Caves 3:
        1 kobold escorts party
        2 deadfall trap disarmed
      Buccaneer Base 2: 255 purchased pass
      Valhingen Graveyard: number of wights in next random encounter
$4A04 Shared flag:
      Podal Plaza: random encounter index
      Slums 14 Ohlo's quest:
        250 agreed to retrieve potion
        255 returned potion
      Kobold Caves 10: 1 dealt with net trap
      Buccaneer Base 6: 255 animals released
$4A05 Shared flag:
      Kobold Caves 9: 1 dealt with spike trap
      Buccaneer Base 6: timer for releasing animals (counts up to 60)
      Valhingen Graveyard 1: count of new fixed skeletons for current visit
$4A06 Valhingen Graveyard 10: count of new fixed zombies for current visit
$4A07 Shared flag:
      Civilized Area: 1 fought city council guards
      Sokal Keep 3: 1 entered
$4A08 Shared flag:
      Slums 3: 250 got message
      Podal Plaza: random encounter monster movement
      Valhingen Graveyard 8: 1 spectre cannot appear in current visit
$4A09 Shared flag:
      Mendor's Library 5a: 1 entered
      Valhingen Graveyard: count of new random wights for current visit
      Valhingen Graveyard 14: number of wights
$4A0A Shared flag:
      Mendor's Library 5b: 1 entered
      Podal Plaza: random encounter monster morale
      Valhingen Graveyard 8: 1 spectre cannot appear in current visit
$4A0B Shared flag:
      Slums 8: 255 killed gypsy
      Sokal Keep 2: 255 huge scorpions defeated
      Mendor's Library 5c: 1 entered
      Valhingen Graveyard 16: 1 spectre cannot appear in current visit
$4A0D 1 Valhingen Graveyard 8 zombie-generating spectre defeated
$4A0E Shared flag:
      Sokal Keep 4: 255 defeated
      Wealthy Area/Temple of Bane: 1 encountering special 4-orc patrol
      Kobold Caves 13: 1 found crude map (Journal Entry 28)
      Zhentil Keep Outpost 1: 1 attacked guards outside room before dinner
      Valhingen Graveyard 1: 1 skeletons defeated
$4A0F Shared flag:
      Kuto's Well Catacombs 4:
        250 treasure available (Norris the Gray defeated)
        255 treasure found
      Zhentil Keep Outpost: 1 dwarf fighter defeated
$4A10 Shared flag:
      Kuto's Well/Kuto's Well Catacombs: 1 in catacombs
      Buccaneer Base 8: 1 purchased heir to Bivant
      Zhentil Keep Outpost 1: 1 night after dinner
      Valhingen Graveyard 11: 1 mummies defeated
$4A11 Buccaneer Base 4: slave pen guards defeated
$4A12 Shared flag:
      Kuto's Well Catacombs 1a: 255 arrows fired by kobolds
      Valhingen Graveyard 5: 1 took noxious fumes damage
$4A13 Shared flag:
      Sokal Keep 8: 255 (Ferran Martinez) visited
      Kuto's Well Catacombs 1b: 255 arrows fired by kobolds
      Kovel Mansion trap:
        0 trap set off
        1 nothing done with trap
        2 trap disarmed
      Buccaneer Base E1: 1 main gate guards defeated
      Zhentil Keep Outpost 2: 1 dinner over
      Valhingen Graveyard 6: 1 skeleton-generating spectre defeated
$4A14 Shared flag:
      Slums 13: 255 entered
      Kuto's Well Catacombs 1c: 255 arrows fired by kobolds
      Zhentil Keep Outpost 1: count of guards defeated after first wave
      Valhingen Graveyard 16: 1 wight-generating spectre defeated
$4A15 Shared flag:
      Kovel Mansion: 1 trap disarmed
      Wilderness: 1 resting
      Valhingen Graveyard 21: 1 vampire defeated 1st time
$4A16 Shared flag:
      Slums: adjustable monster morale
      Kovel Mansion 2: 255 pair of thieves encountered
$4A17 Shared flag:
      Slums: 255 Old Rope Guild entered
      Cadorna Textile House 1: 1 treasure opened
      Zhentil Keep Outpost: alarm counter
$4A18 Shared flag
      Zhentil Keep Outpost: 128 escorted inside
      Valhingen Graveyard 17: spectres defeated
$4A19 Shared flag:
      Slums 15: 255 merchant is gone
      Sokal Keep: 1 gave password to undead patrol
      Kuto's Well 1: 255 encountered kobolds
      Kovel Mansion 3: 1 thief ambush defeated
      Zhentil Keep Outpost 2: 1 discussed Bishop Braccio
$4A1A Shared flag:
      Kuto's Well: 200 rest interrupted
      Buccaneer Base random combat counter
      Zhentil Keep Outpost 2: 1 discussed Tyranthraxus
$4A1B Shared flag:
      Buccaneer Base: 1 killed captain
      Zhentil Keep Outpost 2: 1 discussed Pool of Radiance
      Valhingen Graveyard: used to calculate number of skeletons/zombies/wights
$4A1C Shared flag:
      Zhentil Keep Outpost 2: 1 discussed Ulrich Eberhard
      Valhingen Graveyard 15: 1 took stinging damage
$4A1D Shared flag:
      Slums 15: 1 attacked merchant
      Zhentil Keep Outpost 2 discussion counter
$4A1E 1 Zhentil Keep Outpost E1: attacked by guards in commotion
$4A1F 255 Kuto's Well Catacombs 2 found secret door
$$A20 unused
$4A21 255 Sokal Keep 9 treasure taken
$4A22 1-10 Kuto's Well random encounter counter
      255 Kuto's Well cleared (set to this if this value reaches 10)
$4A23 bit 1 Kuto's Well 2 kobolds guarding well defeated
      bit 2 Kuto's Well 4 hag gave advice
      bit 4 Kuto's Well 4 treasure taken
      bit 8 Kuto's Well 3 defeated
      bit 16 Kuto's Well 3 door forced open
$4A24 255 Norris the Gray encountered
$4A25 unknown (checked in Sokal Keep, but never set anywhere)
$4A26 255 Sokal Keep 8 dealt with Ferran Martinez
$4A27 255 Sokal Keep 7 diary found
$4A28 255 Sokal Keep 5 treasure found
$4A29 255 Sokal Keep 7 treasure taken
$4A2A 1 Wealthy Area/Temple of Bane parleyed with special 4-orc patrol
$4A2B unused
$4A2C unused
$4A2D bit 1 Temple of Bane 1a treasure taken
      bit 2 Temple of Bane 1b treasure taken
      bit 4 Temple of Bane 1c treasure taken
$4A2E bit 1 Wealthy Area 6 treasure taken
      bit 2 Wealthy Area 2 treasure taken
      bit 4 Wealthy Area 4 treasure taken
      bit 8 Wealthy Area 5 treasure taken
      bit 16 Wealthy Area 7 ogre and orcs defeated
      bit 32 Wealthy Area 3 entered
$4A2F bit 1 found Fyerdeth's Discourses on Power
      bit 2 found Urgund's Description of Darkness
      bit 4 found Lex Geographica
      bit 8 found The History of the North
      bit 16 found The Grand Historian's Records of the Arts of War
      bit 32 Mendor's Library 7 treasure found
      bit 64 Mendor's Library 10 treasure found
$4A30 Mendor's Library nearly worthless book discovery counter (max 5)
$4A31 bit 1 Mendor's Library 9 mad man encountered
      bit 2 Mendor's Library 9 mad man joined
      bit 4 Mendor's Library 5a gold sheets found
      bit 8 Mendor's Library 5b gold sheets found
      bit 16 Mendor's Library 5c gold sheets found
      bit 32 Mendor's Library E3 spectre defeated
      bit 64 Mendor's Library 1 basilisk defeated
      bit 128 Mendor's Library 8 kobolds encountered
$4A32 Mendor's Library 6 green slime counter
$4A33 unused
$4A34 1-10 Podal Plaza random encounter counter (not incremented if >=64)
      bit 64: Podal Plaza entered while on mission
$4A35 Podal Plaza mission tracker:
        0 not yet begun
        1 chose "Disguise Party as Monsters"
        2 chose "Sneak, Remaining Unseen"
        254 auction ended
        255 chose "Stride Boldly Forward" or lost stealth; or mission done
$4A36 Podal Plaza rumor counter (max 4)
$4A37 Podal Plaza 2 tavern tracker:
        1 killed buccaneer
        2 fought tavern patrons
        3 tavern abandoned
$4A38 Podal Plaza 1 orc priest of Bane tracker:
        1 talked to orc priest
        2 fought orc priest
$4A39 Valhingen Graveyard Skeleton Kill Score
$4A3A Valhingen Graveyard Zombie Kill Score
$4A3B Valhingen Graveyard Wight Kill Score
$4A3C Valhingen Graveyard Spectre Kill Score
$4A3D 1 Valhingen Graveyard 10 juju zombie defeated
$4A3E 1 Valhingen Graveyard 3 giant skeleton defeated
$4A3F 1 Valhingen Graveyard 13 wraith defeated
$4A40 unused
$4A41 250 Valhingen Graveyard 21 vampire defeated 1st time
      255 Valhingen Graveyard 22 vampire defeated 2nd time
$4A42 bit 1 if <= 3 Valhingen Graveyard 16 spectre defeated at least once
      bit 2 if <= 3 Valhingen Graveyard 17 spectres defeated at least once
      250 Valhingen Graveyard 19 mage joined
      255 Valhingen Graveyard mage or vampire defeated
$4A43 251 Valhingen Graveyard 22 coffin sanctified
$4A44 bit 1 Wealthy Area 8 defeated
      bit 2 Wealthy Area 10 defeated
$4A45 Kovel Mansion count of thieves killed
$4A46 bit 1 Kovel Mansion 8 casket A opened
      bit 2 Kovel Mansion 8 casket B opened
      bit 4 Kovel Mansion 8 casket C opened
      bit 8 Kovel Mansion 8 casket D opened
$4A47 bit 1 Kovel Mansion 10 treasure found
      bit 4 Kovel Mansion 12 treasure found
      bit 8 Kovel Mansion 6 treasure found
      bit 32 Kovel Mansion 1 treasure found
$4A48 bit 1 Kovel Mansion 4 entered
      bit 2 Kovel Mansion 9 defeated
      bit 4 Kovel Mansion 5 entered
$4A49 255 Valhingen Graveyard 3 treasure taken
$4A4A 255 Valhingen Graveyard 21 treasure taken
$4A4B bit 128 Yarash's Pyramid 10 hole created in wall
$4A4C bit 1 Yarash's Pyramid Level 1 south wandering stirges defeated
      bit 2 Yarash's Pyramid Level 1 south wandering driders defeated
      bit 4 Yarash's Pyramid Level 1 south wandering minotaurs defeated
      bit 8 Yarash's Pyramid Level 1 south wandering elves defeated
      bit 16 Yarash's Pyramid Level 1 south wandering kobolds defeated
      bit 32 Yarash's Pyramid Level 1 south wandering human fighters defeated
$4A4D Yarash's Pyramid bit flags for rocks thrown through teleporters
$4A4E bit 1 Yarash's Pyramid Level 1 north wandering human fighters defeated
      bit 2 Yarash's Pyramid Level 1 north wandering displacer beasts defeated
      bit 4 Yarash's Pyramid Level 1 north wandering dwarf fighters defeated
      bit 8 Yarash's Pyramid Level 1 north wandering lizardmen defeated
      bit 16 Yarash's Pyramid Level 1 north wandering thieves defeated
      bit 32 Yarash's Pyramid Level 1 north wandering driders defeated
$4A4F Yarash's Pyramid Level 2 and 3 bit flags for secret doors
$4A50 Yarash's Pyramid 17 dial setting:
        0 blue
        1 copper
        2 silver
        3 gold
$4A51 bit 1 Yarash's Pyramid 13 encountered
      bit 4 Yarash's Pyramid 12 entered
      bit 8 Yarash's Pyramid 12 search defeated
      bit 64 Yarash's Pyramid 14 passed
      bit 128 Yarash's Pyramid 15 machinery destroyed
$4A52 bit 1 Yarash's Pyramid 20 encountered
      bit 2 Yarash's Pyramid 20 friendly resolution
      bit 4 Yarash's Pyramid 16 Yarash defeated
      bit 8 Yarash's Pyramid 19a treasure found
      bit 16 Yarash's Pyramid 19b treasure found
      bit 32 Yarash's Pyramid 19c treasure found
      bit 64 Yarash's Pyramid 18 entered
      bit 128 Yarash's Pyramid 18 searched
$4A53 to $4A58 unused
$4A59 unknown (set in Zhentil Keep Outpost, but never checked anywhere)
$4A5A 1 Zhentil Keep Output 3 defeated
$4A5B unused
$4A5C unused
$4A5D Lizardman Keep lizardman kill counter (max 50)
$4A5E bit 1 Lizardman Keep Catacombs P1 treasure found
      bit 2 Lizardman Keep Catacombs P2 treasure found
      bit 4 Lizardman Keep Catacombs P3 treasure found
      bit 8 Lizardman Keep Catacombs P4 treasure found
      bit 16 Lizardman Keep Catacombs P5 treasure found
      bit 32 Lizardman Keep Catacombs P6 treasure found
      bit 64 Lizardman Keep Catacombs P7 treasure found
      bit 128 Lizardman Keep Catacombs P8 treasure found
$4A5F Lizardman Keep giant lizard kill counter (doesn't work right)
$4A60 bit 1 Lizardman Keep 5 treasure found
      bit 2 Lizardman Keep 3 lizardmen and giant lizard defeated
      bit 4 Lizardman Keep 1 lizardmen and giant lizards defeated
      bit 8 Lizardman Keep 2 giant lizards defeated
$4A61 bit 1 Lizardman Keep P first time visiting any pool
      bit 2 Lizardman Keep 3 storeroom entered
      bit 4 Lizardman Keep 1 central keep entered
      bit 8 Lizardman Keep 2 servants' quarters entered
$4A62 Valjevo Castle hour that alarm started to ring
$4A63 Valjevo Castle minute that alarm started to ring
$4A64 Valjevo Castle hour that alarm will stop ringing (0 if none, 24 for 0)
$4A65 bit 1 Valjevo Castle 1 party successfully disguised
      bit 2 Valjevo Castle 20 mess hall entered
      bit 4 Valjevo Castle 17 dealt with hill giants
      bit 8 Valjevo Castle 18 treasure found
      bit 16 Valjevo Castle 16 fire giants defeated
      bit 32 Valjevo Castle 14 treasure taken
      bit 64 Valjevo Castle Hedge Maze 5 false Tyranthraxus gone
      bit 128 Valjevo Castle 7 hill giants defeated
$4A66 bit 2 Valjevo Castle 13 Cadorna following party
      bit 4 Valjevo Castle Hedge Maze 1 Al-Hyam Dazid gone
      bit 8 Valjevo Castle 9 fighter defeated
      bit 16 Valjevo Castle 21 fire giants defeated
      bit 32 Valjevo Castle 22 read paper with passwords
      bit 64 Valjevo Castle Hedge Maze 2 trolls defeated
      bit 128 Valjevo Castle 24 gnoll killed
$4A67 bit 1 Valjevo Castle 1 talked to gnoll
      bit 2 Valjevo Castle 26 officers defeated
      bit 4 Valjevo Castle 26 entered at night
      bit 8 Valjevo Castle 26 read Cadorna report
      bit 16 Valjevo Castle 26 read flaming aura report
      bit 32 Valjevo Castle 26 read barbarian report
      bit 64 Valjevo Castle 21 got passwords from fire giants
$4A68 Valjevo Castle 25 report reading counter
$4A69 bit 1 Valjevo Castle 1 washerwomen killed
      bit 2 Valjevo Castle 1 got disguise from washerwomen
      bit 4 Valjevo Castle 2 treasure taken
      bit 8 Valjevo Castle 2 smith and fire giants defeated
      bit 16 Valjevo Castle 3 coal storeroom entered
      bit 32 Valjevo Castle Hedge Maze 3 hill giants defeated
      bit 64 Valjevo Castle 4 smokehouse entered
      bit 128 Valjevo Castle 10 clerics of Bane defeated
$4A6A bit 1 Valjevo Castle 11 altar of Bane took silver
      bit 2 Valjevo Castle 11 altar of Bane took swords
      bit 4 Valjevo Castle 10 temple of Bane discovered as impostor
      bit 8 Valjevo Castle 10 temple of Bane conversation flag
      bit 32 Valjevo Castle 12 entered
      bit 64 Valjevo Castle E6 (Northwest) guards suspicious
      bit 128 Valjevo Castle E6 (Southeast) guards suspicious
$4A6B bit 1 Valjevo Castle 5a hill giants defeated
      bit 2 Valjevo Castle 5b hill giants defeated
      bit 4 Valjevo Castle 5c hill giants defeated
      bit 16 Valjevo Castle 13 Cadorna released
      bit 32 Valjevo Castle 13 Cadorna killed
      bit 64 Valjevo Castle 15 defeated
      bit 128 Valjevo Castle Hedge Maze 4 fire giants defeated
$4A6C bit 1 Valjevo Castle 6a gold found
      bit 2 Valjevo Castle 6b gold found
      bit 4 Valjevo Castle 6c gold found
      bit 8 Valjevo Castle Inner Tower secret door flag
      bit 16 Valjevo Castle Inner Tower 1 medusa defeated
      bit 32 Valjevo Castle Inner Tower 3 messenger defeated
      bit 64 Valjevo Castle Inner Tower 3 messenger called away
$4A6D bit 1 Valjevo Castle Inner Tower 4 Genheeris joined
      bit 2 Valjevo Castle Inner Tower 4 Genheeris killed
      bit 4 Valjevo Castle Inner Tower 6 level 8 fighters defeated
      bit 8 Valjevo Castle Inner Tower 6 entered
      bit 16 Valjevo Castle Inner Tower 6 Tyranthraxus defeated
$4A6E to $4A71 unused
$4A72 unknown (set in Valjevo Castle Inner Tower, but never checked anywhere)
$4A73 128 Cadorna Textile House 8 Skullcrusher freed
      255 Cadorna Textile House 8 Skullcrusher no longer here
$4A74 1 Cadorna Textile House 3 circumvented or defeated
      2 Cadorna Textile House 7 Grishnak defeated
$4A75 255 Cadorna Textile House 11 ogre leading hobgoblins defeated
$4A76 unused
$4A77 bit 4 Stojanow Gate 6 defeated
      bit 8 Stojanow Gate 7 defeated
      bit 16 Stojanow Gate bugbears defeated
      bit 64 Stojanow Gate 1 acquired wagon
$4A78 Stojanow Gate bugbear attitude:
        0 unaware
        1 suspicious, but you haven't done anything suspicious recently
        2 suspicious
        3 hostile
$4A79 to $4A7B unused
$4A7C bit 1 Nomad Camp accepted offer of hospitality, quest is ongoing
      bit 2 Nomad Camp fighting nomads
      bit 4 Nomad Camp defeated Hassad or the kobolds
      bit 8 Nomad Camp received treasure from Hassad
$4A7D Nomad Camp feast tracker:
        1 awaiting feast
        2 feast ongoing
        3 feast over
$4A7E Nomad Camp kobold encounter counter (max 3)
$4A7F Nomad Camp nomad encounter counter (max 3)
$4A80 Slums gypsy counter (apparently manipulated outside of scripts)
$4A81 Slums Ohlo quest tracker:
        250 merchant gave potion
        255 took potion back to Ohlo
$4A82 unused
$4A83 255 Slums 13 treasure found
$4A84 unused
$4A85 255 Slums 4 defeated
$4A86 unused
$4A87 bit 1 Diogenes asks you to retrieve the efreeti bottle
      bit 2 Diogenes sees the efreeti bottle
      bit 128 Diogenes upset because you tried to attack him
$4A88 255 Valhingen Graveyard 10 treasure taken
$4A89 255 Valhingen Graveyard 13 treasure taken
$4A8A unused
$4A8B 128 Buccaneer Base heir to Bivant abandoned
      255 Buccaneer Base base captured
$4A8C 255 Received heir to Bivant commission
$4A8D 1 Kobold Caves 14 wave 1 defeated
      2 Kobold Caves 14 reached wave 2
      3 Kobold Caves 14 reached wave 3
      4 Kobold Caves 14 wave 3 defeated
      5 Kobold Caves 15 defeated
      6 Kobold Caves 16 entered
      7 Kobold Caves 18 treasure found
$4A8E 1 Kobold Caves 4 defeated
      2 Kobold Caves 5 treasure found
$4A8F to $4A95 Valhingen Graveyard undead kill reward trackers
$4A96 255 Valhingen Graveyard mission accepted
$4A97 254 Asked to talk to Cadorna about Cadorna Textile House mission
      255 Cadorna Textile House mission received
$4A98 254 Asked to talk to Cadorna about Zhentil Keep diplomatic mission
      255 Zhentil Keep diplomatic mission received
$4A99 254 Asked to talk to Werner von Urslingen
      255 Stojanow Gate mission received
$4A9A 254 Asked to talk to entire council
      255 Valjevo Castle mission received
$4A9B 254 Asked to talk to Bishop Braccio
$4A9C 128 Temple of Bane mission received
      255 Dirten joined the party
$4A9D unused
$4A9E 255 Wilderness inside lair
$4A9F 1 Wilderness found Nomad Camp
$4AA0 bit 1 Wilderness found Lizardman Keep
      bit 2 Wilderness found Kobold Caves
$4AA1 1 Wilderness saw Diogenes from afar
      255 Wilderness saw Diogenes fly into cave
$4AA2 255 Wilderness left Yarash's Pyramid after clearing it
$4AA3 to $4AA5 unused
$4AA6 254 Norris the Gray defeated
      255 Norris the Gray defeat rewarded
$4AA7 254 Sokal Keep 8 dealt with Ferran Martinez
      255 Sokal Keep mission rewarded for success
$4AA8 254 Wealthy Area cleared
      255 Wealthy Area clear rewarded
$4AA9 Buccaneer Base heir to Bivant mission tracker:
        1 heir to Bivant purchased
        128 mission failed
        254 heir to Bivant stolen
        255 mission ended
$4AAA 254 found Fyerdeth's Discourses on Power
      255 rewarded for finding Fyerdeth's Discourses on Power
$4AAB 254 found Urgund's Description of Darkness
      255 rewarded for finding Urgund's Description of Darkness
$4AAC 254 found Lex Geographica
      255 rewarded for finding Lex Geographica
$4AAD 254 found The History of the North
      255 rewarded for finding The History of the North
$4AAE 254 found The Grand Historian's Records of the Arts of War
      255 rewarded for finding The Grand Historian's Records of the Arts of War
$4AAF 254 found one of the other nearly worthless books in Mendor's Library
      255 rewarded for finding one of the other nearly worthless books
$4AB0 1 Podal Plaza mission received
      254 Podal Plaza mission successful
      255 Podal Plaza mission rewarded for success
$4AB1 254 Valhingen Graveyard mission successful
      255 Valhingen Graveyard mission rewarded for success
$4AB2 254 Kovel Mansion mission successful (set if $4A45 >= 21)
      255 Kovel Mansion mission rewarded for success
$4AB3 254 Yarash mission successful
      255 Yarash mission rewarded for success
$4AB4 1 Zhentil Keep Outpost defeated commandant
      253 Left Zhentil Keep Outpost after defeating commandant
      254 Returned from Zhentil Keep Outpost mission
      255 Set to this after council tells you about 254
$4AB5 254 Lizardman mission successful
      255 Lizardman mission rewarded for success
$4AB6 254 Kobold mission successful
      255 Kobold mission rewarded for success
$4AB7 254 Nomad mission successful
      255 Nomad mission rewarded for success
$4AB8 254 Cadorna treasure returned
      255 Cadorna treasure mission ended
$4AB9 254 Stojanow Gate mission successful
      255 Stojanow Gate mission rewarded for success
$4ABA 254 Tyranthraxus defeated
      255 Tyranthraxus defeat rewarded
$4ABB 1-25 Counter for Slums random and set encounters
      254 Slums mission successful (set to this if this value reaches 25)
      255 Slums mission rewarded for success
$4ABC unused
$4ABD 254 Temple of Bane mission successful
      255 Temple of Bane mission rewarded for success
$4ABE 254 Zhentil Keep Outpost mission success, or Cadorna proved as traitor
      255 Zhentil Keep Outpost mission rewarded for success
$4ABF 254 Porphyrys Cadorna killed
      255 Porphyrys Cadorna killed acknowledged
$4AC0 1 angered Phlan
$4AC1 Council reward quest tracker (maximum 10, only some quests count)
$4AC2 255 Mendor's Library mission rewarded for success
$4AC3 unused
$4AC4 Civilized Area boat trip destination
$4AC5 1 Civilized Area met Rolf
$4AC6 unknown (set in Civilized Area, but never checked anywhere)
$4AC7 2 Kobold Caves 8 killed kobold
      255 Kobold Caves used large entrance to enter
$4AC8 1 Cadorna treasure acquired (seal intact)
      128 Cadorna treasure acquired (seal broken)
      255 Cadorna treasure returned or Civilized Area 12 encountered
$4AC9 unused
$4ACA 255 Slums 1 defeated
$4ACB 255 Slums 2 defeated
$4ACC 255 Slums 3 treasure found
$4ACD 255 Slums 7 defeated
$4ACE 250 Slums 6 defeated
      255 Slums 6 treasure found
$4ACF 255 Slums 10 defeated
$4AD0 255 Slums 11 defeated
$4AD1 unused
$4AD2 1 Nomad Camp left nomads prematurely
$4AD3 1 Kobold Caves 17 encountered efreeti
$4AD4 1 Kobold Caves 11 Princess Fatima no longer present
$4AD5 255 Valhingen Graveyard assisted by efreeti
$4AD6 255 Slums 5 treasure found
$4AD7 255 Sokal Keep 6 orcs and hobgoblins defeated
$4AD8 255 Slums 12 defeated
$4AD9 255 Slums 16 defeated
$4ADA unused
$4ADB Kuto's Well well status
$4ADC to $4ADF unused
$4AE0 1 running "game won" script
$4AE1 255 Cadorna Textile House 4 hobgoblins defeated
$4AE2 255 Cadorna Textile House 9 entered
$4AE3 255 Cadorna Textile House 5b hobgoblins defeated
$4AE4 Cadorna Textile House random combat counter (maximum 10)
$4AE5 1 Kobold Caves 6 found kobold
$4AE6 254 Cadorna Textile House cleared
      255 Cadorna Textile House clear rewarded
$4AE7 254 Podal Plaza cleared
      255 Podal Plaza clear rewarded
$4AE8 unused
$4AE9 unused
$4AEA Kovel Mansion 11 cabinet A:
        1 opened
        2 failed to pick lock
        3 left
$4AEB Kovel Mansion 11 cabinet B: as $4AEA
$4AEC Kovel Mansion 11 cabinet C: as $4AEA
$4AED Kovel Mansion 6: as $4AEA
$4AEE Kovel Mansion 8 casket A: as $4AEA
$4AEF Kovel Mansion 8 casket B: as $4AEA
$4AF0 Kovel Mansion 8 casket C: as $4AEA
$4AF1 Kovel Mansion 8 casket D: as $4AEA
$4AF2 1 Valhingen Graveyard 2 skeletons defeated
      11 Valhingen Graveyard 3 giant skeleton defeated
$4AF3 1 Valhingen Graveyard 9 zombies defeated
      11 Valhingen Graveyard 10 juju zombie defeated
$4AF4 1 Valhingen Graveyard 12 wights defeated
      10 Valhingen Graveyard 13 wraith defeated
$4AF5 1 Valhingen Graveyard 4 skeletons defeated
$4AF6 1 Valhingen Graveyard 7 zombies defeated
$4AF7 1 Valhingen Graveyard 14 wights defeated
$4AF8 1 Valhingen Graveyard 18 treasure found
$4AF9 to $4AFF unused

SECTION 11.4.2 - Other Memory Locations
---------------------------------------

These addresses are also referenced in the ECL scripts.

A "character" is a specific character that is either currently selected in the
UI, or is chosen by the LOAD CHARACTER, WHO, or SPELL ECL commands.

$2C90 (calling this redraws the first-person view; often used to reset it)
$49C7 Minute of the turn (minutes ones digit)
$49C8 Turn of the hour (minutes tens digit)
$49C9 Hour of the day
$49CA Day of the month
$49CB Month of the year
$49CC Elapsed years
$49E6 0 indoors
      1 outdoors
$49F0 X-coordinate (previous)
$49F1 Y-coordinate (previous)
$49F2 Previous map ID
$49FB 1 Automap will not work
$49FC Game speed
$49FD Color of sky (standard 16-color palette: 11 = sky blue, etc.)
$49FE Color of ceiling (standard 16-color palette)
$6B00 Character name
$6B15 Character Intelligence
$6B16 Character Wisdom
$6B17 Character Dexterity
$6B18 Character Constitution
$6B19 Character Charisma
$6B20 Character memorized spell table
$6B72 Character race
$6B73 Character class
$6B76 Character maximum hit points
$6B9A Character saving throw vs. paralyzation, poison or death
$6B9B Character saving throw vs. petrification or polymorph
$6B9C Character saving throw vs. rod, staff or wand
$6B9D Character saving throw vs. breath weapon
$6B9E Character saving throw vs. spell
$6BA5 Character thief skill: Pick Pocket
$6BA6 Character thief skill: Open Locks
$6BA7 Character thief skill: Find/Remove Traps
$6BA8 Character thief skill: Move Silently
$6BA9 Character thief skill: Hide in Shadows
$6BAA Character thief skill: Hear Noise
$6BAB Character thief skill: Climb Walls
$6BAC Character thief skill: Read Languages
$6BB8 Morale and NPC status:
        lower 7 bits: morale
        bit 128: set if NPC
$6BBB Character copper
$6BBD Character silver
$6BBF Character electrum
$6BC1 Character gold
$6BC3 Character platinum
$6BC5 Character gems
$6BC7 Character jewelry
$6BC9 Character magic-user levels
$6BCA Character cleric levels
$6BCB Character thief levels
$6BCC Character fighter levels
$6BCD Character druid levels
$6BCE Character monk levels
$6BCF Character paladin levels
$6BD0 Character ranger levels
$6BD6 Character sex
$6BD8 Character alignment
$6C00 Character status:
        0 Character does not exist or is unconscious
        1 Character is okay
        128+status Character has status effect
$6C0C Character combat behavior:
        0 Allied, Controlled
        128 Allied, Uncontrolled
        129 Enemy
$6C19 Character current hit points
$6C1B Character movement
$6DA8 Bitmask for classes trainable in a training hall
$6DB1 Currently selected character
$6DC1 Monster distance
$6DC6 Morale threshold (monsters start checking morale once this % of their
      strength is gone; 100 means monsters always fight to the death)
$6DC7 Last combat result:
        0 Victory
        129 Ran away
$6DC8 Last combat number of monsters killed
$6DC9 255 Party cannot change X or Y coordinates by moving forward
$6DCA 1 Search mode on
$6DCB Surprise for next combat:
        0 Neither side surprised
        1 Monsters surprise party
        2 Party surprises monsters
        3 Monsters and party surprise each other
$6DCF Charisma bonus of party spokesperson (from Statistics: Charisma table)
$6DD2 time you may be able to rest uninterrupted (in minutes, divided by 5)
      0 means you cannot be interrupted
$6DD3 % chance rest is interrupted
$6DD5 1 Party to leave current map
$6DE1 Picture loading (255 means none)
$6DE2 1 Party about to enter temple
$6DE3 1 Next combat does not provide any items
$6E12 Disk number
$6E33 1 Party attacked allies during the last fight
$6E3E Party size
$6E6C 1 Party about to enter shop
$6E6D Shop buying price multiplier (16 is standard)
$6E70 signed 8-bit ad hoc combat bonus to monster THAC0 in next combat
$6E71 signed 8-bit ad hoc combat bonus to party THAC0 and damage in next combat
$6E72 signed 8-bit ad hoc combat modifier to party movement in next combat
$6EF6 Unknown shop modifier (1 is standard)
$8000 (calling this starts a character-vs-character duel)
$8001 (calling this starts a character-vs-monster duel)
$C04B X-coordinate (current)
$C04C Y-coordinate (current)
$C04D Party facing:
        0 north
        1 east
        2 south
        3 west
$C04E door/wall of current square
$C04F event number of current square (upper 1-3 bits are often flags)

SECTION 11.5.1 - Executable Structure
-------------------------------------

This assumes you are using version 1.3.  Offsets apply to the *decompressed*
executable, as some structures get packed there, though you can search for much
of the same information in the unmodified executable.

Offset 0x102AA-0x106D9: spell table, entries are 16 bytes each.  The first 56
entries are same spells as given in Creature File Format; the next 11 represent
magical effects 80-90 in Item File Format.  The format of each entry is:

     Hex
  Offset  Meaning (values are in decimal)
      00  Spell type:
            0 clerical
            1 magic-user
            2 item
      01  Level of spell
      02  If 255, requires an attack roll; otherwise fixed range
      03  Variable range (multiply by spellcasting level)
      04  Fixed duration
      05  Variable duration (multiply by spellcasting level)
      06  Area of effect:
            0 caster
            4 1 target
            5 up to 2 targets
            6 up to 3 targets
            7 up to 4 targets
            8 any tile within line of sight
            9 special handling
            10 diameter 5
            11 diameter 7
            240 no limit to area; limit is instead caster's hit points
      07  Target:
            0 combat
            1 caster
            2 any party member
            4 whole party
      08  Saving throw effect:
            0 no save allowed
            1 negate
            2 half damage
      09  Saving throw used:
            0 paralyzation, poison or death
            1 petrification or polymorph
            2 rod, staff or wand
            3 breath weapon
            4 spell
      0A  Effect addded by spell (0 for none)
      0B  When spell can be cast:
            0 non-combat only
            1 combat only
            2 either
      0C  Spellcasting time
      0D  AI priority (higher means more likely)
      0E  1 if the spell is offensive, 0 otherwise
      0F  minimum number of targets required for the AI to cast spell

Offset 0x10D1C-0x10D73: THAC0 table by level, entries are 11 bytes each
  (levels 0 to 10).  THAC0 is represented by (60 - THAC0).

Offset 0x10D9C-0x10DE3: thief ability table by level, entries are 8 bytes each.

Offset 0x10DE4-0x10E1B: thief ability adjustment table by race ("monster" race
  not included), entries are 8 bytes each.

Offset 0x10E1C-0x10E52: thief ability adjustment table by Dexterity (starts at
  Dexterity 9), entries are 5 bytes each.

Offset 0x10F17-0x10FDA: starting age table, grouped by class (excluding monks
  and multi-class) then race (excluding monster).  Entries are 4 bytes each;
  starting age is [byte 0] + [256 * byte 1] + [byte 2]d[byte 3].  Multi-classed
  characters use the highest age.

Offset 0x10FDB-0x11020: age category table, entries are 10 bytes each and have
  a 16-bit integer for the maximum age for each of the 5 age categories, and
  are then grouped by race (excluding monster).

Offset 0x11021-0x11086: class minimum statistics table (includes multi-class),
  entries are 6 bytes each.

Offset 0x11087-0x11130: class allowed alignments table (includes multi-class),
  entries are 10 bytes each.  First byte is the number of allowed alignments,
  followed by the list of alignments, padded with 0x00.

Offset 0x11131-0x11142: bonus Constitution hit point table for non-warriors,
  one signed 8-bit integer for each value from 3 to 25.

Offset 0x11143-0x11302: experience and spell table; entries for each are:
  * 8 signed 32-bit integers, for experience required (-1 means disallowed)
  * 8 sets of 3 unsigned 8-bit integers, for total spells per level
  Both start at level 2.

Offset 0x11313-0x1147A: saving throw table, entries are 5 bytes each, grouped
  by level (1 to 9) then by class.

SECTION 11.5.2 - Code Hacking
-----------------------------

Spellcasting delay is more than three times that of tabletop version.  If you
want to change spellcasting time to be more true to the original rules (this
will significantly affect game balance):

1. Open GAME.OVR, look for this hex string: 30 E4 99 B9 03 00 F7 F1
2. Change the 03 (should be offset 0x14CC9) to 01.  That modifies this:
     B9 03 00 mov  cx, 3
     F7 F1    div  cx


SECTION 12.1 - Journal Entries
------------------------------

Here is a list of Journal Entries actually referenced by the game, with where
to find them (along with what you need to do to get it if it is not automatic).
Note that information in these entries is not guaranteed to be true.

3 - Sokal Keep 7 (speak correctly to the keep's spectral defenders)
7 - Mendor's Library 4 (search Philosophy section)
8 - Mendor's Library 3 (search History section)
10 - Mendor's Library 8 (accept kobolds' surrender)
11 - Cadorna Textile House 2
14 - Kovel Mansion 11 (open cabinet A)
16 - Kobold Caves 11
19 - Mendor's Library 4 (search Philosophy section)
20 - Kobold Caves 6 (give water to crippled kobold)
21 - Mendor's Library 3 (search History section)
23 - Kovel Mansion 11 (open cabinet A)
25 - Temple of Bane 1 (defeat Mace)
26 - Yarash's Pyramid 11 (search remains)
27 - Yarash's Pyramid 18 (search Yarash's desk)
28 - Kobold Caves 13
29 - Kovel Mansion 7
30 - Valjevo Castle Hedge Maze 1 (threaten Al-Hyam Dazid until he offers notes)
31 - Lizardman Keep (give friendship password to old lizardman)
33 - Yarash's Pyramid 18 (search Yarash's desk)
35 - Yarash's Pyramid 20 (befriend and free enslaved lizardmen)
37 - Mendor's Library 3 (search History section)
38 - Kovel Mansion 4
40 - Yarash's Pyramid 18 (search Yarash's desk)
41 - Kovel Mansion 5
42 - Kobold Caves 2 (search mine tailings)
43 - Valhingen Graveyard 22 (read scroll)
46 - Zhentil Keep Outpost 2 (over dinner, discuss "M"agic -> "M"ention Pool)
47 - Cadorna Textile House 8
48 - Kovel Mansion 9 (defeat thieves)
49 - Yarash's Pyramid 18 (search Yarash's desk)
50 - Kuto's Well Catacombs 3 (defeat Norris the Gray)
51 - Kovel Mansion 4
53 - Wealthy Area 7 (defeat ogre/orc guards)
55 - Nomad Camp (accept nomads' invitation)
56 - Yarash's Pyramid 18 (search Yarash's desk)
57 - Sokal Keep 6 (defeat the orc/hobgoblin ambush)

Entries 4 (map to the silver dragon's cave) and 15 (a not-quite-precise map of
the southeastern Valjevo Castle Hedge Maze) are useful, but are not referenced
anywhere in the game that I know of.

SECTION 12.2 - Novelization
---------------------------

The party that undertakes the quest in the novel is:

Shal (human female fighter/magic-user)
Tarl (human male fighter/cleric)
Ren (human male ranger/thief)

They are multi-classed and equipped with very powerful magical items for low
level characters to make up for the fact that there are only ever three of
them.  Yes, that's the same Shal that later shows up in Pools of Darkness, the
game.  The three are also the main characters in Pools of Darkness, the
novelization.

Tavern brawls are even deadlier in the novel than in the Gold Box games!

Only the following quests are depicted: Sokal Keep; Cadorna Textile House;
Yarash's Pyramid; Valhingen Graveyard; Valjevo Castle Hedge Maze and Inner
Tower.

The Gold Box version, the tabletop version, and the novelization are all
independent of each other.  This is not true for Curse of the Azure Bonds or
Pools of Darkness.

SECTION 12.3 - Historical Accuracy
----------------------------------

Yes, I know, no one is seriously going to think this game is realistic, but I
like to talk about this.

* Standard 1st Edition AD&D has a technology level of AD 1400 plus or minus
  15 years, without the gunpowder weapons that existed at the time.  Even 1420
  starts to have technology beyond what is supposed to exist; 1440 is right
  out, as that's about when Gutenberg introduced his printing press (though
  these do exist far away from the Phlan area).  Gunpowder (which doesn't work
  in the Forgotten Realms) also starts to have a significant effect as the 15th
  century progresses: cannon played a significant role in the siege of Orleans
  (late 1420s), and a decisive one in the fall of Constantinople (1453).

  Later AD&D editions tend not to care about historical accuracy as much as 1st
  Edition.  The reason for this is partly the last point on this list, and
  partly because most people would perceive a realistic treatment as
  unrealistic -- they actually expect a fake version of history, as the
  standard fantasy setting contains numerous elements from the modern era.

* Werner von Urslingen was an actual historical character, known for leading a
  fearsome mercenary army in the 14th century.

* Melee weapons are far lighter in real life than they are in AD&D, and many
  other games copied AD&D's super-heavy weapon model.  A standard 1st Edition
  AD&D long sword weighs 6 pounds.  It's not practical to use a one-handed
  weapon heavier than about 5 pounds at most, and an actual long sword weighs
  about 3 pounds (which is the 5th Edition value).  For comparison, a modern
  baseball bat is definitely a two-handed weapon, but it weighs only about 2
  pounds.

  In the other direction, a long sword weighs 13.0 pounds in Angband and 19.6
  pounds in Ultima VI.  Even those don't touch the absurdity of Robert
  Baratheon's warhammer, which Eddard Stark (not a cripple) can barely even
  lift.

* Broad swords actually are from the early modern era, about the mid-1500s at
  the earliest.  They were intended to accompany firearms.

* Real swords are often blunter than people think.  This is actually
  deliberate; late medieval and early modern European long swords were designed
  so that they could be held two-handed with one hand on the blade (this
  technique is called "half-swording"), specifically to change the weapon from
  a slashing one to a thrusting or bashing one -- slashing is virtually useless
  against a well-armored opponent, but thrusting and bashing still remain
  useful.  (Swordmaking in Japan placed an emphasis on sharpness partly because
  good armor was significantly rarer there than in Europe.)

  Yes, you aren't supposed to slash at a heavily-armored opponent.  Aside from
  half-swording, you can also grapple or overbear such an opponent, wield a
  weapon (e.g., a warhammer) effective against good armor, or simply go after
  the more numerous lightly-armored opponents.

* Those flails your cleric wields are of dubious historical authenticity.
  There is a notable lack of references to them in older literature, and it's
  suspected that the handful of examples in museums are fraudulent.

* Crossbows are supposed to be much easier to use than regular bows; that's why
  they had such an impact in real life.  This does happen to some extent in
  later editions of AD&D, just not 1st or 2nd.  (For a skilled hero, a bow
  would be better because it has a higher rate of fire; reloading a medieval
  European crossbow takes a long time.)

* Assuming the skill is not a problem (not a reasonable assumption for actual
  armies, but fine for a handful of heroes), bows are actually powerful enough
  that they aren't fully superseded by firearms until the appearance of mass-
  produced rifles in the mid-19th century.  On the other hand, bows are not as
  good at punching through plate mail/armor as commonly believed; the reason
  the English won a crushing victory at Agincourt in 1415 wasn't because
  longbows work like wands of magic missiles.

* Slings are actually much deadlier than people (and AD&D rules) generally
  think.  People tend to think of slingshots when slings are mentioned; those
  are genuinely weak.  Slings are extremely difficult to actually aim well,
  though; it's entirely possible to accidentally hurl a sling stone backwards,
  which is unlikely with a bow or gun no matter how much of a new user you are.
  (That means David taking out Goliath is more a matter of superior skill than
  of being a fortunate underdog.)

* It's commonly said that real plate mail isn't nearly as limiting as CRPGs and
  standard fantasy worlds portray them.  That isn't really the case in 1st/2nd
  Edition AD&D, though, which make a distinction between "plate mail" and
  "plate armor".  (Yes, that's weird, but the rules explicitly state it.)
  "Plate armor" is usually what people mean when they say "plate mail", and
  it's "plate armor" that is easy to move around in, very protective, and
  supremely expensive.  "Plate armor" protects the entire body with very few
  gaps, using interlocking overlapping plates to do so, and distributing the
  weight so it's not as encumbering.  It's also, according to the 1st Edition
  DMG, too technologically advanced to exist in a standard AD&D game world.  It
  was invented later (about 1420) than gunpowder weaponry, being developed
  partly to counter it.  Only in the 17th century, during the Thirty Years'
  War, did gunpowder weapons finally become powerful enough to make plate armor
  not worthwhile in combat.

  If you want to look up the formal modern academic terms for plate armor,
  start with "white armor" and "Gothic plate armor"; the difference between
  these is more important than knowing the difference between a glaive and a
  glaive-guisarme.

* In modern usage, "mail" is only supposed to describe armor made of linked
  rings.  So "chain mail" is still a valid term, but "plate mail" is not.  This
  is modern enough that I think its widespread usage is newer than AD&D.

* It's doubtful whether "ring mail" and "banded mail" even ever existed at all,
  historically.  Even the 2nd Edition PHB reports this, but by then people had
  already been throwing around the 1st Edition terms for years.  Gygax cites a
  source from 1909.

* Leather armor did exist, but it wasn't actually used often, because it
  doesn't work well in practice.  This is partly because cloth/padded armor
  actually works better than most people think.

* Shields really ought to protect you better in combat than they do here.  A 5%
  reduction in hit chance really is not much compared to how much it actually
  helped.  This is less true if you have the more technologically advanced
  plate armor around; once armor that good started appearing, elite fighters
  relied less and less upon shields -- but armor that good isn't supposed to
  exist in AD&D.

* It's stated in the sourcebooks (e.g., the Wilderness Survival Guide) that
  lower-level lightning spells aren't as deadly as the real thing.  The reverse
  is actually the case, since in real life, a direct lightning bolt strike only
  kills the victim about 10% of the time.  In AD&D, a Lightning Bolt that does
  5d6 damage will outright kill a person with 10 hit points (more than the
  median soldier) more often than that.

* While pin-and-tumbler locks predate the entire medieval era, they were rather
  exotic items until the invention and spread of the mass-produced Yale lock in
  the mid-19th century.  Their presence is sensible here if they're protecting
  something valuable, but in many CRPGs, including this one, they often protect
  things of little or even no value.  In such cases, it may actually make
  economic sense to steal the lock itself.

* Even major cities in the Forgotten Realms have low populations; there are few
  cities with a population of more than 50,000.  The same is true of most other
  AD&D settings.  Real life and typical fantasy settings both have their
  largest cities with populations in the hundreds of thousands.

  In 1400, Paris was the largest western European city, with a population of
  about 250,000.  The next largest cities would have all been in what is now
  northern Italy.  This is all despite a severe famine that started in 1315
  (roughly the same time the Little Ice Age began and reduced crop yields), the
  Hundred Years' War which started in 1337, and the Black Death which started
  in 1348.

  I suspect the low populations of the typical AD&D setting reflects its more
  direct inheritance from Tolkien compared to most other fantasy fiction.
  Middle-earth in the late Third Age is similarly depopulated, just with
  clearer reasons for it.

* The level of trade depicted in the Gold Box games is more typical of the
  Renaissance or early modern age than the actual late medieval period.

* Inns were also not significant in the medieval era, because there weren't
  enough travelers to justify very many of them.  Travelers tended to rely upon
  one of two alternatives.  (1) Travelers often just relied upon individual
  hospitality; this is partly why sacred hospitality used to be such a big
  deal.  (2) Most travelers in the medieval era were actually religious
  pilgrims, and often stayed at monasteries.  Gygax was aware of this (the 1st
  Edition MM/DMG random encounter tables have you encounter pilgrims fairly
  often), but most of his imitators are not.

  This is related to the above point, because trade results in more travelers.
  The same also applies to a significant extent to taverns.  Not that inns or
  taverns didn't exist at all -- they're a notable element of the Canterbury
  Tales, which date to 1386 -- but they were not common.  (You'll probably
  realize that this statement also depends on exactly when you define the
  medieval era ending.)

* While you don't see it too much in Pool of Radiance, Forgotten Realms
  political entities like Cormyr or Sembia behave an awful lot like modern-day
  Westphalian nation-states, which shouldn't happen in a pre-modern culture
  without good reason.  (Though that is not necessarily unrealistic -- the
  Roman Empire behaved in many ways like a modern nation-state.  It just isn't
  anything like medieval Europe.)

* Similar to the above, those political entities also tend to have significant
  standing armies -- very much like the Romans did, and very much unlike actual
  European medieval powers; very much like most other standard fantasy nations,
  and very much unlike Westeros.

* If you've read a lot of printed fantasy, you may notice there isn't much
  reference to feudalism in AD&D.  This actually accurately reflects the time
  period; western European feudalism started to break down as early as the 12th
  century, and that decline accelerated in the 14th century.  There are
  multiple reasons for this that historians debate furiously, even including
  "feudalism never existed", but probably the most important is the
  centralization of power in kings, which itself happened for all kinds of
  reasons.  The main practical problems with feudalism are the lack of a good
  way to stop two major vassals from fighting each other, and that vassals
  tended to prefer being taxed to the mandatory military service standard for
  feudalism.

  The Black Death in the mid-14th century particularly sped up the decay of
  western European feudalism: many workers died, but capital was preserved;
  thus demand for labor vastly outstripped supply, leading surviving commoners
  to demand, and often actually get, better living conditions.  This in turn
  helped eventually lead to commoners having enough wealth to actually justify
  the numerous inns and taverns found in the standard fantasy setting.

  Feudalism is actually more visible in Tolkien (who kept it muted, because he
  was actually an anarcho-monarchist ... yes, Tolkien actually considered
  himself an anarchist), and in Martin (in Westeros, society typically works on
  an early medieval societal model, despite the latest technology often being
  early modern or even 19th century), than it is in almost all CRPGs.

* Castles stopped being built for military purposes when cannons got good
  enough; cannons became influential in warfare well before firearms displaced
  AD&D-style weaponry.  Dragons, earth elementals, and teleportation should
  also count towards this, really.  (A lot of real castles were actually built
  for aesthetic purposes, because "late medieval is awesome!" has been popular
  for a long time -- Neuschwanstein is probably the best example of this.
  That's the castle the one in Disneyland is based upon.)

* Food supplies are generally not an issue in the standard fantasy world; when
  it does become a problem, it's usually because of a war.  In real life, they
  were a problem even for peacetime affluent societies all the way up to the
  19th century.  There were massive volcanic eruptions in 1783 and 1815, either
  much bigger than any since, that caused global cooling significant enough to
  cause crop failures in the following years.  This was one of the driving
  forces behind westward expansion in the United States; farmland in marginal
  areas was abandoned at the time.  (Those forests in New England that are now
  famous for changing colors in the fall?  Those were mostly farmland when the
  United States declared independence.)

  In the real medieval period, you could expect crop failures resulting in
  famine every several years; a single crop failure generally didn't result in
  a severe famine, but two or more in a row was another matter.

* In the Gold Box games, wolves generally have a bad reputation, as they do in
  much of standard fantasy.  They generally have a much better reputation these
  days, with much of that because they are the sigil of the Starks of Westeros.
  This is likely inspired by real-life western Europe having problems with
  wolves terrorizing urban citizens all the way up to about the 18th century.

* Any magical society with a sufficiently advanced level of magic is going to
  use it as we do technology; you will start to get things like crystal ball
  telecommunications networks and social teleportation services.  This DOES
  happen in Eberron and Harry Potter; the Forgotten Realms also have a high
  magic level and should thus behave in many un-medieval ways.  There's a
  reason why Tolkien, Martin, etc. mostly create low-magic worlds; powerful
  magic like continents sinking into the ocean and 700-foot-high 300-mile-long
  enchanted ice walls should be decidedly exceptional, or it will make your
  world behave untraditionally.

  This is also a reason why Greyhawk is typically the standard AD&D game
  setting: Dark Sun, Eberron, Planescape, and Ravenloft are all deliberately
  un-medieval in many ways, and Dragonlance has its own idiosyncratic
  mythology.

* A "buccaneer" is supposed to be specific to the Caribbean and its age of
  piracy.  "Pirate" is a better culture- and era-independent term.  The Tampa
  Bay Buccaneers are in the right general area, at least.  The ones in this
  game ... not so much.

* Finally, the very concept of not having anachronisms in fiction is itself a
  modern one.  You won't find much like it in Shakespeare, for instance.  It
  only starts to be significant around the time of the popularity of Ivanhoe,
  published in 1819.  Tolkien didn't care much; his societies actually most
  resemble 6th-century England, so many of the things we take for granted in
  fantasy fiction would fit there about as much as express trains, cruise
  missiles, or armored personnel carriers would in AD&D -- and all three of
  those actually DO exist in Middle-earth, incidentally.  (Tolkien was always
  cheerful about anachronisms.)  And when you get to computer games, you have
  battery-powered brass lanterns in the original Adventure, plastic explosives
  in Zork, space fighter combat in Ultima, blaster guns in Might and Magic,
  elevators in Wizardry, tinker gnomes in Krynn, the church of Gond
  Wonderbringer in the Forbidden Realms ... and even if you insist on
  historical accuracy, which relatively few non-modern games even try to do,
  it's very hard to prevent technology from centuries later getting through
  somewhere.  (For instance, doorknobs were only invented less than 150 years
  ago -- but almost the first thing mentioned in The Hobbit is the knob on the
  door to Bag End.)


SECTION 13.1 - References
-------------------------

Here are some other sources you can consult about the game.

AD&D Pool of Radiance Clue Book, ISBN not known (I suspect there isn't one), 64
  pp.  This has a complete set of maps, is reasonably comprehensive, and is the
  classic reference for the game.  Physical copies are of some interest to
  collectors.  Despite being published by SSI, this isn't actually all that
  accurate, though it is still far more accurate than the average Prima
  strategy guide.  Its details appear to better reflect the Apple II or
  Commodore 64 versions of the game.

These three books are the core AD&D books that have many of the basic rules:
  AD&D Player's Handbook (1st Edition), ISBN 0-935696-01-6. (PHB)
  AD&D Dungeon Master's Guide (1st Edition), ISBN 0-935696-02-4. (DMG)
  AD&D Monster Manual (1st Edition), ISBN 0-935696-00-8. (MM)
Note that many other sources apply the 2nd Edition rules to the Gold Box games.
The 2nd Edition rules are relatively similar to 1st Edition rules, but
significant differences still exist.  At the time of Pool of Radiance's
release, 1st Edition AD&D was the only existing edition.  Later Gold Box games
still use mostly 1st Edition rules even though 2nd Edition was then the latest
and greatest in the tabletop world.

AD&D Unearthed Arcana (1st Edition), ISBN 088038-084-5. (UA)  These optional
  rules released later in 1st Edition's lifecycle are mostly not used in the
  Gold Box games, though there are a few exceptions, primarily magical items.

AD&D Monster Manual II (1st Edition), ISBN 0-88038-031-4. (MM2) This has
  several relevant monsters not described in the original Monster Manual, and
  also the rules for statistics of 19 and higher.

AD&D Field Folio (1st Edition), ISBN 0-935696-21-0.  (FF)  While all the other
  Gold Box games draw some inspiration from here, and some monsters featured in
  other CRPGs made their debut here, nothing from this book is in Pool of
  Radiance.

AD&D Forgotten Realms Campaign Set (1st Edition), ISBN 0-88038-472-7.  This has
  the original campaign information for the Forgotten Realms.

AD&D Forgotten Realms Ruins of Adventure Official Game Adventure, ISBN
  0-88038-588-X.  (RoA)  This is the official tabletop game adaptation of the
  computer game.  It follows the same rough overall plot, but there are many
  differences in detail.  It has a reputation for being nowhere near as good as
  the computer game, mostly because it doesn't take advantage of the additional
  interaction a human DM can provide.  It is also generally easier than the
  Gold Box version in principle, perhaps because the computer version has the
  potent magic of "quit and load saved game".

Pool of Radiance, by James M. Ward and Jane Cooper Hong, ISBN 0-88038-735-1,
  316 pp.  This is the official novelization of the computer game.  Like the
  adventure module, its reputation is nowhere near as good as the computer
  game.

Quest for Clues II, ed. Shay Addams, ISBN 0-929373-01-04 (same as for QfC III
  which is odd), 181 pp.  This is the Quest for Clues book with a Pool of
  Radiance walkthrough, on pages 83-93.  As with all Questbusters walkthroughs,
  it isn't particularly detailed.

Computer Gaming World references:
  #49 (Aug 1988) p. 20-21: Sneak preview.
  #54 (Dec 1988) p. 28, 60-62: Two reviews, by Ken St. Andre and Tracie Forman
    Hines; many criticisms, both positive and negative, look strange thirty
    years later.  Scorpia never gave a full-length review.
  #55 (Jan 1989) p. 33: early sales reports.
  #64 (Oct 1989) p. 41: nominee for 1989 RPG of the Year.
  #72 (Jun 1990) p. 18: yes, it really was that slow on an original IBM PC.
  #76 (Nov 1990) p. 70: yes, the AI really was that bad in earlier versions.
  #85 (Aug 1991) p. 51: Scorpia gives a hint about Tyranthraxus.
  #87 (Oct 1991) p. 20: Scorpai gives a brief review in her RPG survey.

  CGW's reader ratings initially were high, though not as high as Magic Candle,
  Ultima V, or Wasteland.  (You should play all of those, too!)

  Minor mentions (including ads):
  #38 (Jul-Aug 1987) p. 42
  #42 (Dec 1987) p. 23
  #44 (Feb 1988) p. 36
  #45 (Mar 1988) p. 17
  #48 (Jun 1988) p. 57
  #49 (Aug 1988) p. 10
  #50 (Sep 1988) p. 22, p. 46
  #52 (Oct 1988) p. 38
  #53 (Nov 1988) p. 50
  #56 (Feb 1989) p. 63
  #60 (Jun 1989) p. 8-9
  #61 (Jul 1989) p. 40-41
  #62 (Aug 1989) p. 8-9
  #66 (Dec 1989) p. 69
  #67 (Jan 1990) p. 86
  #68 (Feb 1990) p. 64
  #77 (Dec 1990) p. 127

http://gbc.zorbus.net/index.html
  Gold Box Companion home page.  The most useful tool in its own right, this
  page also has links to most other Gold Box Web pages worth mentioning.

http://www.gamebanshee.com/poolofradiance/
  Polished and reasonably comprehensive Web-based walkthrough.

http://www.gamefaqs.com/
  nes/587518-advanced-dungeons-and-dragons-pool-of-radiance/faqs/51292
  This is the best walkthrough I know of for the NES version.

For more technical references, see Hacking Overview.

SECTION 13.2 - FAQ Version History
----------------------------------

v1.32 (2020-06-07)
* Added effect of transfer to Hillsfar.

v1.31 (2020-05-19)
* Added this version history (retroactive to all previous versions).
* Moved references/acknowledgments to the end; it was taking up too much space
  at the beginning.
* Added note that the best way to reach me is by e-mail.  (I belatedly realized
  that there were lots of comments in places I wasn't checking regularly.)
* Charm Person works on the magic-user in Valhingen Graveyard to convert him to
  a fully friendly NPC.

v1.30 (2020-05-10)
* I overhauled the script that generates monster statistics.  There is more
  information, and most of the mistakes from the days when I added statistics
  by hand should be gone.  (The AI I wrote was a little bit too intelligent --
  the real Pool of Radiance AI favors studded leather armor over Bracers AC 6
  for ... reasons.)
* There is more accurate information on how much XP money and items give.
  That's also now part of the monster statistic generator script.
* All placed magically charged treasure now mentions how many charges it starts
  with.
* The spellcasting delay adjustment is actually division by 3, not 2.  That
  makes spellcasting significantly more powerful than it is in the tabletop
  game.  (So even though Stinking Cloud has a tabletop game delay of 2 ... that
  gets divided by 3, then rounded down to 0, so it actually has no delay in the
  Gold Box games.)
* There are now instructions on how to modify spellcasting delay, in case you
  want something closer to the actual tabletop rules.  (It'll significantly
  alter game balance, of course.)
* Added how AI spellcasting priority works.
* With both spellcasting delay and AI priority not obvious and not in the
  manual, added a table.
* Clarification of area of effect spells: it wasn't clear before what "diameter
  3/5/7" meant.
* You can raise the dead by casting a targeted spell like Cause Light Wounds or
  Burning Hands in combat. (This bug is gone starting in Secret of the Silver
  Blades.)
* More detail on how Animate Dead works.
* Correction for the Sleep spell.  (Yet again.  I think I really do have it
  right this time.)
* The Stinking Cloud AC penalty is larger than I thought.
* Mirror Image is not as effective as it should be, or as in later games. (Also
  fixed in Secret of the Silver Blades.)
* Haste and Slow do not actually affect initiative.
* Strength: for Open Doors, easy vs. hard is in fact implemented, so I put that
  in the table.
* Dexterity: actual adjustments to thief skills.  There are a couple wrong
  numbers in the game's table.
* For avoiding attacks, being third-from-the-bottom is better than being #5 in
  the order.
* A "small/medium" target for a weapon is only so if it BOTH has that size in
  the game files AND has a 1-tile icon.
* For some reason, I thought you couldn't backstab Large opponents in the 1st
  Edition tabletop game.  There's no such rule.  (There *is* a rule much like
  that in 2nd edition.)
* Added the actual THAC0 table used by the game is now.  It's a hybrid of
  1st/2nd edition rules (as you might expect), and it also changes by specific
  Gold Box game.
* More information on binary format.
* Added Computer Gaming World references.
* Added Acknowledgments.

v1.22 (2019-07-11)
* Fixed up a lot of technical details I had added.

v1.21 (2019-07-10)
* "Porphyrys Cadorna" actually had a "y" in it I missed.
* Mention of the not-implemented tabletop rule about firing missiles into a
  melee.

v1.20 (2019-07-07)
* THAC0 in the bestiary corrected for how the game actually calculates it.
* Added Morale mechanic section, and specific monster morale in most cases.
* Added Party Strength calculation.
* Added distance that monsters start, and what Distance 1 and 2 mean.
* Added more detail on how random encounters are generated and resolved.
* Added more detail everywhere on how safe resting is.
* Added detail on where "F"leeing will move the party.
* Added detail on damage the party can take outside of combat.
* Added temple spell casting section.
* Added surprise rules (which only Pool of Radiance fully supports).
* Added detail on how the game handles time.
* Added range for throwable melee weapons.
* Added many more technical notes.
* Correction for the Sleep spell.  (Again.)
* Thrown weapons do not get a Strength bonus.  (That's a 2nd edition rule.)
* Valhingen Graveyard commission moved to its own subsection, because the game
  special-cases it in so many ways, and added a lot more detail on it.
* Warning about items randomly disappearing -- it's not actually a bug as
  people sometimes think.  You probably got pickpocketed in Phlan's taverns.
* It does not generally actually help to lower statistics for the sake of
  gaming Party Strength.
* Added note that the game doesn't bother to implement the proper rules about
  recovering from being knocked unconscious.
* Civilized Area: much more information about how visiting a tavern works.
  (That was way back when I was first starting to write this ...)
* Civilized Area: more information about hirable NPCs.
* Civilized Area: added triggers for the proclamations changing.
* Slums: you must deal with Ohlo one way or the other to clear the block.
* Podal Plaza: in version 1.3, if you do not screw up the mission, the block
  should always be clearable.
* Kovel Mansion: even more precision on how number of thief kills works.
* Kobold Caves: more details on traps.
* Lizardman Keep: more precision on how number of lizard man kills works.
* Valhingen Graveyard: more detail on how monsters can regenerate.
* Valhingen Graveyard: discovered conditions under which sanctification works.
* Stojanow Gate: added how the roll for bluffing the bugbears works.
* Valjevo Castle: more detail on how talking with the washerwomen works.
* Extended warning about hit point overflow if you are hacking.
* Monsters #9 and #82 are now known not to actually appear anywhere.

v1.10 (2019-04-07)
* Added advice for starting stats rolled normally.
* Added section on restarting the game.  (It gets asked fairly often.)
* Added section on transferring characters to Curse.  (Asked even more often.)
* Added experience value table for gold/platinum/gems/jewelry.
* Added first version of the Flag List.
* Correction for the Sleep spell.
* Civilized Area: two ways to learn that Porphyrys Cadorna is a traitor.
* Kovel Mansion: more precision on how number of thief kills works.
* Valhingen Graveyard: Skeleton/Zombie/Wight zones now marked (because that
  last one is dangerous).
* Moved my primary e-mail address after decades.
* Gold Box Companion moved to a new Web page.

v1.02 (2016-10-05)
* Corrected error on statistics transferring to Curse of the Azure Bonds.
* Added how to crack version 1.3.
* Added link to FRUA fan remake.

v1.01 (2016-10-04)
* More notes on the Necklace of Missiles.

v1.00 (2016-10-03)
* Original release.

SECTION 13.3 - Acknowledgments
------------------------------

Acknowledgments:
  * Joonas Hirvonen (author of Gold Box Companion)
  * Simeon Pilgrim (author of the modernized Curse of the Azure Bonds)
  * CondorMan (discoverer of many bugs only present in earlier games)

SECTION 13.4 - Things I Want
----------------------------

Things I'd like (please e-mail me if you have any of the below):

(1) a complete, original physical copy of the IBM version 1.0 or 1.1
(2) what are the actual defensive bonuses conferred by combat terrain features
    you can step on?

View in:
GameFAQsfacebook.com/GFAQstwitter.com/GameFAQsHelp / Contact UsChange Colors

gamespot.comgiantbomb.commetacritic.com

SitemapAdvertisePartnershipsCareersPrivacy PolicyAd ChoiceTerms of UseReport Ad

CA Privacy/Info We CollectCA Do Not Sell My Info

© 2020 CBS Interactive Inc. All rights reserved.



------------------------------------------------------------

    A character's contribution to Party Strength is the sum of:
    * 0.4 * cleric level
    * 0.8 * magic-user level
    * 0.5 * each point of AC below 0 (0 if AC is 0 or above)
    * 0.5 * each point of THAC0 below 21 (0 if THAC0 is 21 or above)
    * 0.1 * current hit points
    rounded down to the nearest integer. The values used for AC and THAC0 are the ones shown on your character screen.

    Party Strength is the above contributions for every character summed.

